---
title: Blood Banking and Transfusion Medicine Fellowship 
layout: default
categories:
- fellowships
---
#  Blood Banking and Transfusion Medicine Fellowship

This program involves the University of Minnesota Medical school, University
of Minnesota Medical Center, Fairview, the Memorial Blood Centers of
Minnesota, the American Red Cross North Central Blood Services of St. Paul,
Hennepin County Medical Center, and the Veterans' Affairs Medical Center. This
fellowship integrates the best aspects of these transfusion services and blood
centers into an exceptionally balanced, yet diversified transfusion medicine
experience. While rotations vary with individual trainee interests, the
standard program includes: 6 months at Fairview-University, 1 month Memorial
Blood Centers, 2 months American Red Cross, 6 weeks Veterans' Affairs Medical
Center, and 6 weeks Hennepin County Medical Center. The fellows spend the
majority of their time at their assigned institutions and participate weekly
in conferences involving the entire transfusion medicine faculty. The
fellowship is designed to prepare physicians for a career on either a hospital
transfusion service or in a regional blood center. Substantial clinical
involvement and extensive experience with laboratory problem solving and
clinical consultation is provided. Complete laboratory training related areas
such as immunology and coagulation is also available. As the fellow gains
experience, more clinical duties and special projects are assigned. A second
year of predominantly research is available for exceptional trainees.

#### Teaching Faculty

  * Program Director: [_J. Jeffrey McCullough, MD_](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/mccullough/)
  * Blood Banking / Transfusion Medicine Teaching Faculty  
_University of Minnesota Medical Center, Fairview:_

[J. Jeffrey McCullough,
MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/mccullough/), Program Director and
Professor, Variety Club Chair, and Director, Center for Molecular and Cellular
Therapy.

[David McKenna, Jr., MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/mckennad/),
Associate Professor, Director, Divsion of Transfusion Medicine, Cell Therapy
Lab, and Molecular & Cellular Therapeutics.

[Nicole Zantek, MD, PhD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/zantek/),
Assistant Professor, Director, Special Coagulation Laboratory.

[Shanna Morgan, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/morgan/), Assistant
Professor, Director, Apheresis and Donor Center.

[David H. Maurer, PhD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/maurer/), dABHI,
Director, HLA Lab.

[Claudia S. Cohn, MD, PhD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/cohn/),
Assistant Professor.

Agustin Dalmasso, MD, Professor.

_Memorial Blood Centers of Minnesota:_

[Jed Gorlin, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/gorlin/), Medical
Director.

[Elizabeth Perry, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/perry/),
Associate Medical Director.

_American Red Cross North Central Blood Services, St. Paul:_

[David C. Mair, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/mair/), Senior
Medical Director.

[Gary Bachowski, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/bachowski/),
Assistant Medical Director.

Salima Shaikh, MD

_Veterans' Affairs Medical Center:_

[Sabeen Askari, MD, Medical
Director](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/askari/)

_Hennepin County Medical Center:_

[John Crosson, MD, Medical
Director](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/crosson/home.html)

#### Teaching Facilities

University of Minnesota Medical Center, Fairview is a world leader in solid
organ and hematologic stem cell transplantation and the treatment of
hematological malignancies, including stem cell processing and freezing
programs. The hospital has a broad range of active clinical services that
extensively interact with the transfusion service, including cardiovascular
surgery, obstetrics, neonatology, gynecology, and others. The Donor Center and
Apheresis Unit provide peripheral blood stem cell collections, a busy
therapeutic apheresis service, and carry out many developmental projects.

Memorial Blood Centers of Minnesota is an American Association of Blood Banks
(AABB) Rare Donor Reference Laboratory, conducts parentage testing, performs
transfusion-transmitted disease and clinical diagnostic testing for viral
markers, serves as a local immunohematology reference laboratory, and provides
expertise in the legal aspects of blood banking.

American Red Cross North Central Blood Services, St. Paul is a large, multi-
service blood center that collects about 240,000 whole blood units annually,
primarily in off-site mobile operations. The departments of hospital services
and blood donor collections provide the fellow with insight into the regional
management of blood resources. The blood center operates a large apheresis
unit that collects products for both transfusion and research. The blood
center also houses the ARC national neutrophil serology reference laboratory,
a platelet cross match and platelet serology laboratory, a red cell serology
laboratory, a cord blood bank, and a donor registry for the National Marrow
Donor Program.

The Veterans' Affairs Medical Center provides a range of clinical services,
including general and cardiovascular surgery, cancer therapy, and hematology.
The fellow learns laboratory techniques directly at the bench under
supervision, participates in the operation of a hospital-based blood donor
program, and consults on clinical problems of transfusion medicine.

Hennepin County Medical Center provides advanced proficiency in trauma /
massive transfusion practices, obstetric-associated transfusion practices, and
the principles of a hospital transfusion service.

#### Curriculum

The goal of the fellowship in Transfusion Medicine and Blood Banking is to
provide comprehensive training in transfusion medicine, immunohematology, and
blood banking. Following the fellowship, each fellow should be familiar with
the basic principles of blood groups, compatibility testing, blood and blood
component therapy, adverse effects of transfusion, blood donor recruitment and
selection, blood collection, transmissible disease testing, apheresis
including therapeutic apheresis, bone marrow and stem cell processing,
parentage testing, laboratory administration, and total quality management.
The fellow should have a working knowledge of the regulatory aspects involved
in blood donor collection and transfusion medicine services. The fellow will
obtain this comprehensive training by experience at five institutions. The
material to be covered at each institution is shown in Table 1.

In general, blood donor recruitment, donor selection, blood collection (whole
blood and apheresis), component production transmissible disease testing,
inventory management, and the organization and management of a community blood
supply system will be provided at the ARC and MBCM. The patient oriented
experiences are provided at the three hospital locations which complement each
other. UMMCF is an academic medical center with major programs in solid organ
and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, oncology, cardiovascular surgery,
obstetrics, and a neonatal ICU. HCMC is the city county hospital that serves
as the primary trauma center and provides general medical care for a diverse
population with a wide variety of medical, surgical, and pediatric problems.
The VAMC is a general acute care facility that provides the fellow experience
in consulting and the operation of a general community hospital type facility.

At UMMC, the fellow has extensive clinical involvement with component
(especially platelet) use, blood components for surgery (due to large organ
transplant service), therapeutic apheresis (done by blood bank donor center)
and interaction with other clinical service residents and fellows such as
hematology, marrow transplant, organ transplant, pediatrics and general
surgery.

At HCMC, the fellow provides medical direction to the transfusion service
under the supervision of the staff. This includes attending morning rounds,
following up on appropriate cases, reviewing antibody workups, reviewing
platelet transfusions and evaluating transfusion reactions. The fellow will
also supervise the blood and component therapy of patients undergoing massive
transfusion especially in the operating rooms or the emergency department.

Although five institutions are involved, there is good coordination and
integration of fellowship training. Faculty from all of the institutions
attend a weekly breakfast meeting along with the fellows and other trainees
assigned to the blood banks including residents, medical students,
hematology/oncology fellows, etc. Interesting or difficult cases from all the
five institutions are discussed along with topics of interest in blood banking
and transfusion medicine.

The objectives of the Fellowship include:

  * Demonstration of competency in routine hospital blood bank clinical and management decisions such as selection of blood for patients with multiple antibodies and maintaining adequate blood inventories for provided services.
  * Evaluation and management of patients with disorders treated by apheresis.
  * Evaluation of transfusion reactions and deviations from blood bank policy
  * Selection of appropriate blood components for stem cell transplant patients in the pre- and post-transplant setting
  * Selection of blood components and pharmaceuticals for patients with bleeding and/or coagulopathy
  * Demonstration of knowledge of regulatory requirements mandated by the federal and state governments or non-governmental certifying agencies.

To successfully address these objectives, the fellow will be required to
demonstrate achievement in the six general competency areas. Each major
rotation is specifically designed with these competency areas in mind (see
individual rotation goals and objectives).

  1. Medical knowledge (MK)
  2. Patient care (PC)
  3. Interpersonal and communication skills (CS)
  4. Professionalism (Prof)
  5. Systems-based practice (SBP)
  6. Practice-based learning and improvement (PBLI)

#### Rotation Objectives

University of Minnesota Medical Center (UMMC-FV)

The fellows spend eight months of the training year working with faculty at
UMMC.

  * Recognize, treat and prevention of the following reactions to transfusion: febrile, allergic, acute hemolytic, delayed hemolytic, anaphylactic, septic, transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease, transfusion-related acute lung injury, and circulatory overload (PC, MK, PBLI)
  * Manage massive transfusion including the appropriate and timely ordering of laboratory tests for monitoring the patient and recognizing the metabolic and hemostatic consequences of massive transfusion (PC, MK)
  * Understand the available literature on immune suppression from transfusion and adverse effects of transfused leukocytes (MK, PBLI)
  * Implement methods to minimize transfusion-related Infections (MK, PC)
  * Understand the use of lookback procedures to identify transfusion recipients of potentially infectious units (PC, SBP)
  * Recognize, prevent, or manage the coagulopathy in massive transfusion (PC, MK).
  * Understand different coagulation factor concentrates, their indications, and disadvantages (MK).
  * Recognize and manage coagulopathies associated with a variety of clinical conditions such as cardiovascular bypass, renal disease, liver disease, ECMO devices, etc (MK, PC).
  * Understand the various strategies for managing coagulation factor inhibitors (MK, PC).
  * Understand the current theories and applications of hematopoietic transplantation, including advantages and disadvantages of bone marrow, peripheral blood, and umbilical cord blood-derived hematopoietic cells in transplantation (MK, PC, PBLI).
  * Understand the concepts of engraftment, ways in which it is measured, and use of cytokines to speed engraftment (MK).
  * Understand techniques for thawing, washing and infusing cryopreserved hematopoietic cell grafts, including known adverse reactions. Will participate in these infusions (PC, MK).
  * Understand the overall theory and methods of T-cell depletion, and related cell engineering methods to control or exploit graft-vs.-host disease (PC, MK).
  * Understand major selected cell engineering methods involving cell expansion, cell activation, and genetic modification (PC, MK, PBLI).
  * Manage the administration of blood and components including specimen and patient identification, thawing, pooling, issuing, transport time and temperature, filtration (PC, MK, SBP, CS).
  * Understand the procedures used for serologic and molecular HLA typing (PC, MK).
  * Understand the procedures used to crossmatch patients with potential kidney donors (PC, MK).
  * Understand the selection of one or more unrelated marrow donors (PC, MK).
  * Understand the different kinds/extent of matched platelet donors and participate in the selection of donors for patients who are refractory to platelet transfusion (PC, MK).
  * Understand the indications and process of therapeutic phlebotomy (MK, PC)
  * Understand and implement methods of intraoperative blood salvage - instrumentation, indications, and potential complications (PC, SBP)
  * Understand how to prepare for CAP, AABB, FDA, state, or local inspection preparations or inspections (SBP).
  * Understand federal regulations such as: CLIA, OSHA, and FDA good manufacturing practices (PC, SBP)
  * Review ongoing quality control, proficiency testing, and competency evaluation activities (PC, SBP)
  * Conduct blood usage review including requirements, methods, transfusion committee activities, crossmatch to transfusion ratio, blood outdating and wastage (PC, SBP)
  * Actively lead a hospital transfusion committee to facilitate communication between those involved with transfusion (PC, SBP, CS)
  * Recommend and perform transfusion practice audits (PC, PBLI)
  * Participate in continuing education program for technologists, physicians, providers within the department and institution (MK, PBLI, CS).

Minneapolis Veterans Administration Medical Center (VAMC)

The fellow spends one month working with transfusion and blood banking faculty
at the VA. Upon completion of the rotation at the VAMC the fellow is expected
to:

  * Understand basic blood group serology (MK)
  * Understand techniques (manual and automated) to perform ABO & Rh typing, antibody screen, antibody identification, crossmatching and direct antiglobulin test (MK, PC).
  * Recognize, prevent, or manage the coagulopathy in massive transfusion (PC, MK).
  * Understand different coagulation factor concentrates, their indications, and disadvantages (MK).
  * Recognize and manage coagulopathies associated with a variety of clinical conditions such as cardiovascular bypass, renal disease, liver disease, ECMO devices, etc (MK, PC).
  * Understand the various strategies for managing coagulation factor inhibitors (MK, PC).
  * Recognize, treat and prevention of the following reactions to transfusion: febrile, allergic, acute hemolytic, delayed hemolytic, anaphylactic, septic, transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease, transfusion-related acute lung injury, and circulatory overload (PC, MK, PBLI)
  * Manage massive transfusion including the appropriate and timely ordering of laboratory tests for monitoring the patient and recognizing the metabolic and hemostatic consequences of massive transfusion (PC, MK)
  * Understand the available literature on immune suppression from transfusion and adverse effects of transfused leukocytes (MK, PBLI)
  * Implement methods to minimize transfusion-related Infections (MK, PC)
  * Understand the use of lookback procedures to identify transfusion recipients of potentially infectious units (PC, SBP)
  * Conduct blood usage review including requirements, methods, transfusion committee activities, crossmatch to transfusion ratio, blood outdating and wastage (PC, SBP).
  * Understand transfusion and blood banking practices specific to VA facilities (PC, SBP)
  * Actively lead a hospital transfusion committee to facilitate communication between those involved with transfusion (PC, SBP, CS)
  * Recommend and perform transfusion practice audits using VA-specific standards (PC, PBLI)

Hennepin County Medical Center

Upon completion of the HCMC rotation the fellow is expected to:

  * Serve as an effective clinical consultant to the major hospital services on issues of transfusion and blood component use (PC, MK, PC, Prof, SBP).
  * Recognize and manage major types of transfusion reactions (PC, MK).
  * Understand the major issues blood component storage including anticoagulation, temperature, expiration dates, red cell additive solutions, inventory levels (MK, SBP).
  * Understand the role of blood banking and transfusion in care of trauma patients (PC, SBP, PBLI)
  * Manage the administration of blood and components including specimen and patient identification, thawing, pooling, issuing, transport time and temperature, filtration (PC, MK, SBP, CS).
  * Understand and implement methods of intraoperative blood salvage - instrumentation, indications, and potential complications (PC, SBP)
  * Conduct blood usage review including requirements, methods, transfusion committee activities, crossmatch to transfusion ratio, blood outdating and wastage (PC, SBP)
  * Actively lead a hospital transfusion committee to facilitate communication between those involved with transfusion (PC, SBP, CS)
  * Recommend and perform transfusion practice audits (PC, PBLI)
  * Monitor hospital transfusion practices compared to institutional, national or international benchmarks (PBLI, PC).
  * Rrecognize and manage major types of coagulopathies and bleeding and thrombotic problems (PC, MK, PBLI).
  * Recognize, prevent, or manage the coagulopathy in massive transfusion (PC, MK).
  * Recognize and manage coagulopathies associated with a variety of clinical conditions such as cardiovascular bypass, renal disease, liver disease, ECMO devices, etc (PC, MK).
  * Understand the various strategies for managing coagulation factor inhibitors (PC, MK).

American Red Cross

Blood banking and transfusion fellows spend one month working at the American
Red Cross Blood donation center. Upon completion of this rotation it is
expected that fellows will:

  * Understand the basic strategies in donor recruitment (groups, individuals, volunteer versus paid) (PC, SBP)
  * Understand the issues in donor screening through interview and physical examination (PC, SBP, MK)
  * Recognize and appropriately manage ethical issues in donor screening and testing (PC, Prof, SBP)
  * Understand the major aspects of blood component preparation and testing (including blood groups, Infectious disease marker testing and confirmatory testing) (MK, SBP)
  * Understand the major aspects of blood donor deferral counseling in the case of positives screening results (CS, SBP)
  * Understand the overall aspects of regional distribution and control of blood supply (MK, SBP).
  * Understand the indications and process of therapeutic phlebotomy (MK, PC)
  * Recognize and follow all confidentiality laws and requirements for reporting infectious disease markers to public health agencies (Prof, CS, SBP).
  * Understand the information management systems/requirements needed in a blood donation and banking facility (PC, SBP, CS)
  * Understand the role of cord blood in hematopoietic cell transplantation (PC, MK).
  * Understand the structure and operation of a cord blood bank (PC, SBP).
  * Understand the medical evaluation and other criteria used to determine the suitability of cord blood for banking (PC, MK).
  * Understand the ethical issues involved in cord blood banking including those relating to consent (PC, Prof).
  * Understand Neutrophil-specific antigens
  * Understand the use of Neutrophil serology including immunofluorescence and agglutination assays (MK, PC)

Memorial Blood Centers

  * Understand the basic strategies in donor recruitment (groups, individuals, volunteer versus paid) (PC, SBP)
  * Understand the issues in donor screening through interview and physical examination (PC, SBP, MK)
  * Recognize and appropriately manage ethical issues in donor screening and testing (PC, Prof, SBP)
  * Understand the major aspects of blood component preparation and testing (including blood groups, Infectious disease marker testing and confirmatory testing) (MK, SBP)
  * Understand the major aspects of blood donor deferral counseling in the case of positive screening results (CS, SBP)
  * Understand the indications and process of therapeutic phlebotomy (MK, PC)
  * Understand the overall aspects of regional distribution and control of blood supply (SBP).
  * Recognize and follow all confidentiality laws and requirements for reporting infectious disease markers to public health agencies (Prof, CS, SBP).
  * Understand the information management systems/requirements needed in a blood donation and banking facility (PC, SBP, CS)

#### Major Topic Overview

Topic Covered UMMCF VAMC ARC MBCM HCMC

Blood groups


•




RBC antibody investigation

•

•

•

•


Compatibility testing

•

•




Donor recruitment



•

•


Donor evaluation/selection



•

•


Blood collection



•

•


Component production



•

•


Donor apheresis



•

•


Autologous and directed donations



•

•


Component therapy

•




•

Clinical consultation

•

•



•

Trauma massive transfusion

•




•

Coagulation/bleeding

•

•



•

Marrow transplantation

•





Obstetrics

•





Neonatal and pediatric transfusion

•



•


Transfusion reactions

•

•



•

Therapeutic apheresis

•





Therapeutic phlebotomy

•


•

•


Intraoperative blood salvage

•




•

Hematopoietic stem cell processing

•





Novel cell processing

•





HLA

•





Transfusion committee

•

•



•

Information systems

•


•

•


Administration & management

•


•

•


Blood utilization

•




•

Regional inventory management



•

•


Platelet and neutrophil serology



•

