---
title: Microbiology / Mycology / Parasitology / Virology - Multi-institutional Rotation 
layout: default
---
#  Microbiology / Mycology / Parasitology / Virology - Multi-institutional
Rotation

The rotation in the Microbiology/Virology Laboratories is designed to provide
the residents with a core program in microbiology and virology, with
concentrations on general microbiology, antibiotic susceptibility testing,
molecular diagnostic approaches in this field, mycology, parasitology,
virology, and mycobacteriology. In addition to first-hand experience with
methods and techniques, specimen processing, and a general understanding of
workflow, there is opportunity for assessing how to introduce new technologies
or substitution of new assays for older assays, as well as for appropriate
utilization of the laboratory.

  * Coordinating Teaching Faculty Members  
[Patricia Ferrieri, M.D.](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/ferrieri/)

[Henry Balfour, M.D.](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/balfour/)

Sophie Arbefeville, M.D.

  * Training Site:  
University of Minnesota Medical Center, Fairview, University Campus

Hennepin County Medical Center

  * Duration of Rotation:  
2 months (1 month at UMMC, 1 month at HCMC)

  * Post Graduate Level of Residents Involved  
PGY 1-4

#### Goals and Objectives

General Aerobic and Anaerobic Microbiology

Following this course, a trainee who has satisfactorily completed the rotation
will

  1. be able to perform a good Gram stain and will be able to distinguish between  

    1. gram-positive and gram-negative organisms, and
    2. rods, cocci, and yeasts
  2. be able to read direct Gram stains on clinical specimens, recording the approximate numbers and types of organisms and cells seen
  3. be able to streak plates and obtain isolated colonies
  4. be able to distinguish colonies of streptococci, staphylococci, and gram-negative rods on sheep blood agar plates. Be able to recognize colonies which are not streptococci, staphylococci, or gram-negative rods, such as diphtheroids, _Bacillus_, _Neisseria_, yeast, etc. Perform Gram stains of colonies when unable to distinguish them macroscopically
  5. be able to distinguish the various species of gram-negative bacilli on the commonly used differential media on the basis of their colonial morphology and fermentation reactions
  6. be familiar with the media described in Laboratory Procedures in Diagnostic Microbiology. When questioned, will  

    1. give at least the use for each medium
    2. explain why the medium is used, and
    3. how the medium works
  7. when given a mixture of gram-positive cocci and gram-negative rods be able to separate them in one day by using proper media and techniques
  8. when given a species of a clinically important bacterium be able to identify it using the reference material at hand (the laboratory manual or other recommended references)
  9. when given any clinical specimen select the appropriate media necessary for the isolation of clinically important bacteria from that specimen and  

    1. be able to recognize and identify the normal flora that might be found in any given clinical specimen and will be able to list the important pathogens to be found in any specimen
    2. be able to state the reason for using each type of medium used for a given clinical specimen
  10. be able to understand and discuss modern blood culture and blood fungus detection systems and other automated equipment for microbial identification
  11. be able to state the clinical significance for each organism when given actual laboratory reports of respiratory, urine and other miscellaneous culture
  12. be able to relate the principles upon which antimicrobial dilution, disc diffusion, and E-strip susceptibility testing is based
  13. be able to outline the methodology for two different antimicrobial assay procedures and describe the appropriate temporal collection of specimens and, in addition, be able to perform an assay by one of the procedures outlined for defining the antibiotic level in serum
  14. be able to outline the methodology and value of the serum bactericidal assay and be able to perform this procedure
  15. be able to describe the methods of appropriately obtaining culture specimens from all body areas and be able to outline proper methods of specimen transport to a laboratory facility
  16. be able to describe the necessary components of an effective and efficient quality control program for a microbiology laboratory
  17. be able to relate the necessary features of a laboratory safety program
  18. understand the principles of cDNA probes and PCR-based assays for pathogens, e.g., _N. gonorrhoeae_ and _Chlamydia trachomatis_
  19. understand enzyme immunoassay principles for detection of microbial products and toxins, e.g., _C. difficile_ toxin A
  20. understand rapid antigen detection systems, e.g., direct specimen tests CSF, urine and direct bacterial colony tests (examples: latex agglutination for Hib and group B strep, ELISA-based assays)
  21. understand general principles of anaerobic bacteriology, including collection and processing of specimens
  22. understand epidemiology of mycobacterial infections and general concepts of identification of major species of Mycobacteria, including molecular approaches
  23. have an understanding of principles of general virology, indications for virus cultures, rapid antigen detection, and antibody assays for various viruses, including HIV.

Antimicrobial Testing

Following this course, a trainee who has satisfactorily completed the rotation
will become familiar with the following methods performed in the antimicrobial
testing section:

  1. Susceptibility testing methods  

    1. disc diffusion
    2. micro broth dilution
    3. macro broth dilution
    4. agar dilution
    5. semi-automated
    6. E-strip
  2. Methods for testing fastidious organisms  

    1. micro broth dilution
    2. agar dilution
  3. Specialized test methods  

    1. MBC
    2. serum bactericidal titer (SBT)
    3. synergy
  4. Resistance screening methods  

    1. staphylococci
    2. _Streptococcus pneumoniae_
    3. Beta lactamase
    4. _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_
    5. high-level aminoglycoside resistance
  5. Antimicrobial resistance  

    1. resistance mechanisms
    2. antimicrobial biopatterns (statistics)
  6. Antifungal susceptibility testing  

    1. yeasts
    2. filamentous fungi
  7. Antimicrobial levels in body fluids by bioassay
  8. Serological tests for group A _Streptococcus_  

    1. ASO screen
    2. ASO titer
    3. Anti-DNase B titer

Mycobacteriology

  1. Introduction  

    1. Clinical manifestations of mycobacterial infection
    2. Pathogenesis of TB and leprosy
    3. Histology of mycobacterial infection
    4. Epidemiology of TB
    5. TB infection control
    6. Treatment
  2. Isolation and Identification of Mycobacteria  

    1. Sources of isolates
    2. Specimen collection and transportation
    3. Specimen processing
    4. Microscopy
    5. Culture examination and identification  

      1. Runyon's grouping
      2. Radiometric techniques
      3. Differentiation of NTB from mycobacteria other than TB  

        1. Niacin
        2. NAP test
        3. Nucleic acid probes
        4. Gas liquid chromatography
        5. Susceptibility testing  

          1. solid media
          2. radiometric
        6. Molecular amplification techniques and direct identification of mycobacteria

Mycology

Following this course, a trainee who has satisfactorily completed the rotation
will

  1. understand what media and incubation temperatures best facilitate the isolation of fungi from various clinical specimens
  2. become familiar with direct preparations and tests used in Mycology  

    1. perform/interpret KOH prep
    2. review use of India Ink prep
    3. Gram stain as it pertains to Mycology
    4. modified acid-fast stain
    5. tease preps
    6. cryptococcal antigen
  3. understand the difference between yeasts and molds
  4. learn methods for identifying yeast  

    1. colony morphology
    2. microscopic morphology
    3. cream of rice media
    4. sugar fermentations
    5. ascospore agar
    6. caffeic acid disc
    7. Vitek YBC and other sugar assimilation systems
  5. differentiate various species of yeast (through observation of patient cultures and use of reference books) including:  

    * _Candida albicans, tropicalis, glabrata, krusei, lusitaniae_
    * _Cryptococcus neoformans, albidus, laurentii_
    * _Rhodotorula_
    * _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_
    * _Torulopsis_
    * _Trichosporon beigelii_
    * _Blastoschizomyces_
    * _Prototheca_
  6. learn methods for identifying molds  

    1. colony morphology
    2. microscopic morphology
    3. slide culture technique
    4. subculture media used to enhance sporulation, exhibit resistance to cycloheximide, and demonstrate thermotolerance
    5. specialized media for dermatophyte ID such as urea, cornmeal agar with dextrose, trichophyton agars, hair test, rice grains
    6. specialize media for identification of aerobic actinomycetes such as casein, xanthine, tyrosine, lysozyme broth/basal broth, urea agar
  7. differentiate various species of molds (through observation of patient cultures, reference slides/reference books) including:  

    * DIMORPHIC MOLDS  

      * _Blastomyces dermatitidis_
      * _Histoplasma capsulatum_
      * _Coccidioides immitis_
      * _Sporothrix schenkii_
    * BRANCHING FILAMENTOUS ORGANISMS (aerobic _Actinomycetes_)  

      * _Nocardial/Streptomyces_
    * DERMATOPHYTES  

      * _Microsporum_
      * _Trichophyton_
      * _Epidermophyton_
    * ASPERGILLUS Sp.  

      * _A. fumigatus, flavus, niger, terreus_
    * MISCELLANEOUS HYALINE MOLDS INCLUDING  

      * _Penicillium_
      * _Paecilomyces_
      * _Scopulariopsis_
      * _Acremonium_
      * _Fusarium_
      * _Chrysosporium_
      * _Pseudallescheria boydii_
    * ZYGOMYCETES  

      * _Rhizopus_
      * _Mucor_
      * _Cunninghamella_
      * _Absidia_
    * DEMATIACEOUS MOLDS  

      * _Alternaria_
      * _Curvularia_
      * _Drechslera_
      * _Cladosporium_
      * _Aureobasidium pullulans_
      * _Phoma/Chaetomium_
      * _Phialophora verrucosa_
      * _Exophiala jeanselmei_
      * _Fonsecaea pedrosoi_
  8. become familiar with the hazards involved in this area and use proper safety measures
  9. become acquainted with helpful Mycology references

Parasitology

Following this course, a trainee who has satisfactorily completed the rotation
will

  1. become familiar with appropriate techniques for identification of intestinal parasites (primarily stool specimens)  

    1. criteria for evaluating satisfactory specimens
    2. use of preservatives
    3. methodology 
      * concentration techniques
      * permanent smears
      * swube collection kit for pinworm detection
      * Entero Capsule string test
    4. differentiation of intestinal parasites (larvae, cysts, trophozoites) through studies of positive samples and reference books including:  

      * PROTOZOA/FLAGELLATES  

        * _Entamoeba histolytica and coli_
        * _Endolimax nana_
        * _Iodamoeba buetschlii_
        * _Dientamoeba fragilis_
        * _Chilomastix mesnili_
        * _Giardia lamblia_
        * _Trichomonas hominis_
      * TREMATODES  

        * _Fasciolopsis buski_/Heterophytes/Metagonimus
      * CESTODES  

        * _Taenia_
        * _Hymenolepsis nana_ and _diminuta_
        * _Diphyllobothrium latum_
        * _Schistosoma haematobium, mansoni_, and _japonicum_
      * NEMATODES  

        * _Ascaris lumbrichoides_
        * _Trichuris trichiura_
        * _Enterobius vermicularis_
        * Hookworm
      * COCCIDIA  

        * _Cryptosporidium_ and _Cyclospora cayetanensis_
        * _Isospora_ and _Sarcocystis_
        * _Blastocystis hominis_
  2. become familiar with appropriate techniques for identification of blood and tissue parasites  

    1. requirements for blood smears, Knott's concentration, skin snips for microfilariae, _Leishmania_ culture, _Acanthamoeba/Naegleria_ - FA smear and culture and smear for _Toxoplasma gondii_
    2. methodology 
      * Giemsa stain
      * Knott's concentrate
      * skin snips for microfilariae
      * Amoeba culture/FA smear
      * CSF for _T. gondii_
    3. differentiation of blood and tissue parasites through studies of positive samples and reference books including:  

      * SPOROZOA  

        * _Plasmodium vivax, ovale, malariae, falciparum_
        * _Babesia_ spp.
        * _Pneumocystis carinii_
      * FLAGELLATES  

        * _Leishmania braziliensis, donovani_
        * _Trypanosoma cruzi, gambiense/rhodesiense_
        * _Trichomonas vaginalis_
      * AMOEBAE  

        * _Naegleria/Acanthamoeba_
      * COCCIDIA  

        * _Toxoplasma gondii_
      * FILARIAL WORMS  

        * _Wuchereria bancrofti_
        * _Brugia malayi_
        * _Loa loa_
        * _Onchocerca volvulus_
        * _Mansonella perstans_
      * TREMATODES  

        * liver/lung - _Clonorchis sinensis_
  3. become familiar with techniques for identification of  

    * ticks
    * mites
    * lice
  4. become acquainted with the life cycles of the more common parasites of medical importance through study of the Atlas of Medical Helminthology and Protozoology
  5. become acquainted with helpful parasitology references

Virology

Residents taking the Virology Laboratory rotation will become familiar with
cell culture techniques, specimen processing, viral isolation and
identification of viruses in cell culture, techniques to detect viral antigens
and antibodies, and molecular diagnostic techniques, especially PCR.

At the end of the Virology rotation, the resident should have knowledge in the
following areas:

  * CELL CULTURE  
Understand sterile technique; understand the source, type and usage for
various cell lines in a clinical virology laboratory; understand splitting
procedures for cell lines.


  * PROCESSING AND RECEIVING  
Understand specimen collection, transportation of primary specimen types, test
requesting and processing procedures for primary specimen types.


  * ISOLATION  
Be familiar with the common human viruses and know the cell lines in which
each produces cytopathic effect; identify specific viruses by cytopathic
effect (presumptive ID); distinguish between HSV and VZV by use of monoclonal
antibody typing - direct immunofluorescence and ELISA; understand the
hemadsorption test for respiratory viruses and complete identification by
monoclonal antibody typing - indirect immunofluorescence.


  * ANTIGEN/ANTIBODY TESTING  
Understand several of the most common immunological procedures routinely used
in a clinical virology laboratory (i.e., ELISA, latex agglutination, indirect
immunofluorescence, and culture enhanced immunofluorescence); know principles
of all assays performed, the advantages and limitations of each procedure and
the interpretation and the clinical significance of test results.


  * MOLECULAR DIAGNOSTICS  
Observe molecular methods for the detection of viruses and virus mutations;
understand the principle of methods performed and the interpretation and the
clinical significance of test results.

#### Guidelines for Patient Care and Specimen Handling

Specimen handling in the Microbiology and Virology Laboratories is the direct
responsibility of the laboratory technologists and medical laboratory
technicians. The residents under supervision of these individuals have an
opportunity to perform specimen processing of a limited number of specimens at
the beginning of the rotation at the University Hospital Laboratory.
Supervision of the residents in their decision-making in the laboratory is
under the supervision of the medical staff of the laboratory.

#### Overview of Daily and Responsibilities

The residents rotate in different sections of the laboratory and start with an
introduction and audiovisual tutorial, demonstration of media and specimen
processing. They carry out various tests under supervision of technical leads
in the lab or the laboratory supervisor. The residents do not generate
interpretative reports in Microbiology and Virology, but are familiarized with
the interpretations generated by the medical director. Daily laboratory rounds
are carried out by the Medical Director, Dr. Ferrieri, and these rounds are
attended by Infectious Diseases faculty, fellows in training, residents and
medical students. "Significant" laboratory results are presented, and there
are frequently demonstrations. The residents are given the opportunity to
present exhibits on lab rounds, which would include showing growth on
specialized media, microscopic features, and biochemical reactions of
particular organisms they are seeing. The residents are involved in evaluating
patients' clinical records on the patient care units, in order for us to
assess the needs for some of the requested tests. A typical rotation for the
residents is attached to this description.

#### Resident Opportunities to Function as a Consultant to Other Physicians

Frequently, the residents obtain relevant patient information from the charts
or from a requesting physician. The medical directors refer some inquiries to
the residents, commensurate with their level of training, and then they pursue
investigation, which may also include literature searches with very unusual or
difficult patient problems. The interactions may include any physician on the
attending staff at the hospitals and infectious diseases specialists in the
departments of internal medicine, pediatrics, and surgery. We interact with
other laboratories in our complex, including the Molecular Diagnostic
Laboratory, Special Hematology, as well as the above-cited Surgical Pathology
Laboratory.

#### Description of On-call Duties

At the present time, the resident is "on-call" in Microbiology during regular
working hours. The resident interacts with the faculty member supervising the
laboratories. There is very close interaction at all times between the faculty
and the residents during daytime, and every opportunity is used to teach. For
example, if there are emergency blood smears for malaria (which are processed
in the Microbiology Laboratory), the residents and faculty member would
collaborate on these and discuss the findings.

#### Structured Formal Education in Management of the Microbiology/Virology
Laboratories:

The resident is requested to attend the weekly Microbiology staff meetings.
The residents now participate in inspecting the laboratories for our internal
laboratory accreditation for CAP. In addition, financial decision-making
choice of laboratory instruments and assays and staffing issues are discussed
by the Directors with the residents.

#### Required Conferences/Seminars

  * Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Grand Rounds
  * Lab Medicine and Pathology Research Seminar
  * Infectious Diseases Conference (Depts of Pediatrics and Medicine). This conference permits the discussion of unusual infectious diseases problems and the role of the laboratory.
  * The Clinical Pathology Conference

#### Optional Conferences

  * Residents Conference
  * Morbidity, Mortality, and Management Conference, Department of Pediatrics. Frequently, there are infectious diseases patients presented and an opportunity for the resident to present what the Microbiology Laboratory has done on behalf of that patient.

#### Scholarly Activities/Research Activities During the Rotation

When the rotation was longer than two months, the residents were expected to
carry out a few weeks of research; for example, doing molecular
characterization of bacteria involved in nosocomial infections or hospital
epidemics. The two-month rotation does not permit that activity. However, the
residents are expected to carry out literature searches on unusual cases or
microbiologic issues. In addition, the Medical Director provides many original
articles relevant to each section of the laboratory rotation, and these are
discussed then with the residents on rotation.

There has not been a fellow in Microbiology for several years, but such
fellows have had more graded responsibility in the laboratory and devoted 50%
or more of their time to research activities.

#### Basis, Method and Criteria for Resident Evaluation

Residents are evaluated on the assessment of their performance of their daily
activities at the bench by the Medical Directors directly observing their
performance, as well as soliciting information from the laboratory supervisors
and laboratory technical leads. Residents are also evaluated on the
presentation of their clinical pathology conferences, focused on microbiology
or virology. In addition, they are evaluated on the performance of their
proficiency (unknown) specimens, and on their presentations at daily
laboratory rounds. The residents are given feedback on their performance
midway during the rotation, and then again a person-to-person discussion of
the written evaluation at the end of the rotation.

#### Educational Resources

The Microbiology Laboratories have teaching files of slides of interesting
microorganisms and a tutorial that is used at the beginning of the rotation as
well as throughout the rotation. Other key references include all of the
procedure books that are at each of the specialty areas of the laboratory. In
addition, there are copies of the Manual of Clinical Microbiology by Murray,
P.R., et al, of which each resident has a copy, with the latest edition
available in the Quality Control/Research and Development section of the
laboratory. The other references include monthly copies of the Journal of
Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, available in
the laboratory. Original articles are provided as well by the Medical
Directors, and the residents are given a packet of articles, both at the
Minnesota Department of Health, where they carry out their mycobacterial
experience, and at the Veterans Administration Hospital. There are too many
articles to list them separately, but these are constantly updated.

#### Computer Information Systems Available

Patient data is currently available on two systems: the Abaton system for
Fairview-University Hospital laboratories; the Lab Care system for the other
entities in the Fairview Health System.

Literature searches can be performed on-line via the University of Minnesota
Bio-Medical Library Databases and Information Sources, and this is utilized
frequently by all the residents.

