---
title: Interviewing 
layout: default
---
#  Interviewing

You should arrive at the Program Coordinator's office in the morning of your
interview.

Jennifer McDaniel's office is located on the 1st floor of the [Mayo Memorial
Building](http://umn.edu/twincities/maps/Mayo/) in room D185.

**Jennifer McDaniel**  
GME Program Coordinator

Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology

University of Minnesota Medical School

420 Delaware St. SE/MMC 609

D185 Mayo Memorial Building

Minneapolis, MN 55455

### Getting to the interview

[**The Commons Hotel**](http://www.commonshotel.com/directions.aspx)

615 Washington Avenue SE

Minneapolis, MN. 55414

612-379-8888

**Airport Taxi**  
763-592-6400

**Yellow Taxi**  
(612) 824-4444

### Directions

To the University Campus:

[http://www1.umn.edu/pts/maps/directions.html](http://www1.umn.edu/pts/maps/di
rections.html)

Once on campus:

![](http://residency.pathology.umn.edu/sites/default/files/Untitled%201.png)

### Eligibility and Application

To be eligible for appointment, the clinical-base candidate must be a student
in good standing at an American or Canadian medical school approved by the
Council of Medical Education of the American Medical Association. A rotating
or straight internship approved by the ACGME (Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education) also meets admission requirements and may be used
to satisfy the PGY-1 requirement.

Graduates of foreign medical schools must hold an ECFMG or FLEX certificate or
possess a license to practice medicine in the United States. A Minnesota
medical license is not required for appointment, but each resident should make
the necessary arrangements early in their final year if they anticipate
remaining in Minnesota.

Application must be done through [ERAS (Electronic Residency Application
Service)](http://www.aamc.org/audienceeras.htm) for PGY-1. Applications are
processed in late summer and fall so that an interview can be completed prior
to December 15th, so both parties are prepared to match within the NRMP
program by the February deadline date. All PGY-1 appointments are made through
NRMP and candidates must conform to all NRMP guidelines and dates. For
information regarding participation in the matching program or application
through ERAS, check with your Dean's office, or write to:

National Resident Matching Program, 2450 N Street, NW, Ste. 201, Washington,
D.C. 20037-1141. Applicants with a foreign medical degree should check with
the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates (ECFMG) for
information on ERAS and NRMP.

*****Only applications processed through the ERAS system are accepted for match positions.

*****Applications will be evaluated and qualified candidates will be invited for an interview and tour of our facility and educational program.

*****Ample opportunity will be provided for the applicant to visit and laboratories and meet with residents and faculty.

In summary, application requires the following:

  1. Completed application form
  2. Medical School Dean's letter
  3. Personal statement
  4. Medical School and pre-medical transcripts (originals or certified copies)
  5. USMLE or COMLEX scores
  6. Current letters of recommendation (3)
  7. Copy of ECFMG certificate if graduated from foreign school
  8. Any other appropriate credentials, e.g., clinical-base documentation of entering at CA-1 level

Submission of the above credentials is required prior to the personal
interview. **No candidate will be considered until all the requirements are
fulfilled.**

The University of Minnesota Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology
considers resident training to be a core function which is vital to our
mission. The faculty is available at all times to aid residents and applicants
in the selection of training programs best suited to the goals of the
candidate.

