---
title: Hematopathology Fellowship 
layout: default
---
#  Hematopathology Fellowship

This program in hematopathology is intended to provide advanced post-graduate
training in diseases affecting the hematopoietic system and includes
instruction in lymph node, spleen, blood, body fluid and bone marrow
pathology. Under direct staff supervision, the educational goals and
objectives for this program are improved proficiency in the examination and
interpretation of body fluid, spleen, lymph node, blood and bone marrow
cytology, histopathology, cytochemistry, and immunohistochemistry. In
addition, the program integrates necessary supporting data from the
Immunophenotyping and Flow Cytometry, Cytogenetics, Molecular Diagnostics, and
Coagulation Laboratories. The fellow is also responsible for reviewing tissue
and other surgical and cytologic pathology specimens that might include an
evaluation for or exclusion of a hematopoietic malignancy.

The one-year program consists of six months of blood, body fluid, lymph node,
hematopoietic surgical pathology and bone marrow pathology and six months of
elective rotations in research, molecular diagnostics, cytogenetics,
coagulation, and/or immunopathology. The trainee is responsible for the day-
to-day management of the bone marrow laboratory, including supervision of
residents and medical students. The trainee is on-call to examine surgical
pathology specimens that might require evaluation for hematopoietic pathology.
The trainee also serves as a consultant to the routine acute-care hematology
laboratory.

For exceptional academically oriented trainees, a potential two-year program
may be arranged, which consists of the above rotations with an increased
emphasis on lymph node or bone marrow pathology or hematopathology related
research project.

#### Teaching Faculty:

  * Program Director  
[Robert McKenna, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/mckennar/)

  * Hematopathology Teaching Faculty  
_Lymph node, Blood and Bone Marrow Pathology:_

[Timothy Singleton, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/singleton/),
[Vanessa Dayton, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/dayton/), [Sophia
Yohe, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/yohe/), [Michael Linden, MD,
PhD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/linden/), Yi Zhou, MD, PhD

_Immunophenotyping and Flow Cytometry:_

[Timothy Singleton, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/singleton/)

#### Curriculum

  * **Technical and equipment training in Hematology and Flow Cytometry** - Two 1-week rotations.
  * **Lymph node, Blood and Bone Marrow Service** - Seven 4-week rotations.
  * **Coagulation Service** - 4 weeks.
  * **Immunophenotyping and Flow Cytometry** - Integrated with lymph node, blood and bone marrow training.
  * **Molecular Diagnostics and Cytogenetics** - 8 weeks.
  * **Elective/Research** - 7 weeks (Vacation - 3 weeks).

#### Requirements

In addition to the general Program requirements, three years of approved
straight CP or four years of approved combined AP/CP residency training is
required at the time of matriculation, including experience in diagnostic bone
marrow and lymph node pathology.

#### Lymph Node Rotation

Lymph Node Biopsies (Ten 4-week rotations integrated with bone marrow,
coagulation, molecular pathology and research)

_Goals and Objectives._

Throughout the duration of the fellowship the fellow participates in reviewing
lymph nodes and other surgical specimens with the possibility of extranodal
lymphoma or other hematopathology under the supervision of the surgical
pathology or hematopathology staff assigned for lymph node teaching. The
fellow independently reviews the histopathology and integrates the
immunohistochemistry to generate a surgical pathology report. The fellow and
the staff then review the cases together at a multi-headed microscope. The
fellows are responsible for integrating data from special laboratories such as
flow cytometry, molecular diagnostics and cytogenetics and for the
communication of difficult diagnoses to the clinicians and for presentation of
interesting cases at the hematology malignancy conference.

_What are the responsibilities of the fellow on the lymph node service?_

It is the fellow's responsibility to review lymph node biopsies and surgical
specimens with possible extranodal lymphomas or other hematopathology seen in
surgical pathology, to integrate immunohistochemical, flow cytometric,
molecular diagnostic and cytogenetic information and to generate a
comprehensive report. Further he /she reviews these cases with designated
attending staff. The fellow is responsible for presenting cases to the
clinicians at the biweekly Hematology-Malignancy conference. The fellow is
also responsible for presentation of cases at the biweekly
Cytogenetics/Molecular Diagnostics correlation conference. The fellows may
select a theme for this conference and identify historical cases and review
the relevant literature.

_What are the responsibilities of the attendings on the lymph node service?_

The attendings supervise interpretation of lymph node biopsies and the
integration of data from special studies. They provide didactic teaching
(lectures and unknown conferences) and one-on-one teaching at sign out and at
review of outside consult cases.

The attending staff oversees the preparation and presentation of materials at
Hematology Malignancy conference, cases of the week and Grand Rounds.

Cytochemistry, Immunochemistry, Flow Cytometry, Molecular Biology

_Goals and Objectives._

**Cytochemistry:** There is no separate rotation for cytochemistry. Interpretation of cytochemical stains such as Chloracetate esterase, leukocyte alkaline phosphatase, terminal deoxynucleotidase, myeloperoxidase, Sudan black, non specific esterase, tartrate resistant acid phosphatase and hemoglobin acid elution are integrated into the bone marrow service.

General Hematology-Bone Marrow Service

_Goals and Objectives._

The fellow provides medical consultation to the hematology laboratory during
the months that he/she is on the bone marrow service. All blood and body fluid
specimens from the hematology laboratory that require review by a
hematopathologist are first examined by the trainee, whose interpretations are
then reviewed with a hematopathology attending physician when appropriate.

During the first month of the fellowship the trainee is provided with an
orientation to the electronic cell counters, coagulation instruments and
laboratory computers by the general hematology laboratory supervisor.

Trainees use computer systems to assist them in tracking their assigned cases.
Trainees use computer databases in anatomic pathology to get lists of their
pending cases or newly assigned cases. Through these databases, they use word
processing software to edit and complete their provisional drafts of surgical
pathology, blood smear and bone marrow biopsy reports. They can also use these
databases to look up historical results on patients and identify cases with a
similar theme for group study. These systems are also used for billing and CPT
coding functions. Trainees use laboratory information systems to track
specimens and record test results in both a manual and automated manner. They
use the computers to assist in data interpretation of testing such as the
lupus inhibitor panel. They also use patient care networks to look up results
on patients, along with clinical dictations, radiology results, and operative
reports. They can also use these databases to look up historical results on
patients and identify cases with a similar theme for group study.

Trainees attend quality assurance/control conferences for their assigned
clinical services.

Trainees are asked to prepare data for these conferences on issues such as
turn-around times, testing parameters and correlation studies and, clinical
utilization of various tests.

#### Immunohistochemistry

_Goals and Objectives._

The trainee has the responsibility for QA/QC evaluation of all of the
pathologist-ordered immunohistochemical stains, under faculty supervision and
prior to the distribution of the slides to the ordering pathologist. The
trainee also has the following responsibilities:

  1. Participation in daily laboratory QA/QC, including slide checks, dilution checks, paraffin block checks with documentation of appropriate QA/QC parameters;
  2. Participation in the evaluation of a new antibody including literature review, selection of vendor, appropriate antibody pretreatment with enzyme digestion or antigen retrieval, selection of antibody titer and incubation time and evaluation of reactivity of antibody with a variety of tumors;
  3. Development of a selective "sausage tissue control block".
  4. Researching and presenting a didactic lecture on an antibody of his/her choice.

#### Flow Cytometry/Immunology/Serology (Integrated with blood, bone marrow
and lymph node pathology service)

_Goals and Objectives._

Trainees begin by reviewing laboratory instrumentation and techniques with the
laboratory technologists. They also analyze a large number of historical
teaching cases on a mock flow cytometer and then discuss them with the staff
pathologist. After the first week, the trainees become increasingly involved
in reviewing current cases in the laboratory and prepare the original draft of
the immunophenotyping report, under the supervision of the attending staff.

The trainee is expected to obtain the relevant clinical history and
correlating pathology on the cases they review with the attending staff. This
involves discussions with the patient care teams and other pathology
laboratories, including special hematology, molecular diagnostics,
cytogenetics, and surgical pathology. The trainees perform, under the guidance
of the laboratory staff, the preparation and testing of a flow cytometry
specimen and observe the testing of the other specimens. They participate in
the generation of the three reports listed above.

The trainee is expected to answer queries with regard to appropriate testing
and patient results. These interactions may include physicians from Medicine
Clinic, Hematology/Oncology, HIV Clinic, Bone Marrow and Solid Organ
Transplant Services, and others. The trainee is also expected to be able to
discuss results with trainees, fellows and staff from the other Special
Diagnostics Laboratories.

#### Molecular Pathology (integrated in Molecular Diagnostics and
Cytogenetics-8 weeks)

_Goals and Objectives._

Trainees review and assist in the interpretation and preparation of reports on
the above list of tests performed in the molecular laboratory. The trainees
participate in daily sign-out rounds of current cases in the Molecular
Diagnostics Laboratory, T and B cell gene rearrangements, molecular detection
of bcr-abl, PML-RAR-a and other leukemia-lymphoma specific translocations, HPV
and bone marrow transplant engraftment studies, inherited disorders including
Prothrombin G20210A. Each trainee will have a case log of approximately
300-400 cases during their molecular genetics rotation.

Trainees are responsible for gathering clinical data from the patient's
clinical team and referring institutions, along with other laboratory data and
findings. This information is then correlated with the molecular test results
to prepare a clinically meaningful interpretation. The trainees also
participate/present in the cytogenetics lecture series and the weekly
molecular diagnostics journal club.

At the beginning of the rotation, trainees work closely with the teaching
staff in interpreting lab test results, correlating them with relevant patient
data, and preparing the molecular reports. With more experience, the trainee
is given more responsibility for interpreting cases, reviewing the current
literature, and preparing the draft reports with a clinical correlation
section that considers the clinical history, tissue pathology diagnoses, and
current literature. These draft reports are then edited by the molecular
laboratory director and discussed with the trainee.

#### Coagulation (4 weeks)

_Goals and Objectives._

At the start of the rotation, the laboratory director shows the trainee how a
particular interpretation is done. On the second day, the trainee is expected
to do at least some of the interpretations before reviewing the day's cases
with the staff. By the end of the first week, the trainee should be able to
provisionally interpret all of the test results before staffing them. As the
rotation progresses, the trainee should become faster and more proficient in
their interpretations. By the end of the rotation, the trainee should be able
to do interpretations quickly and with minimal or no editing of their reports
by the attending staff.

Trainees generate reports on von Willebrand antigen (VWag) crossed
immunoelectrophoresis (CIEP) that include comments on quantitative Factor 8,
VWag Ristocetin cofactor (RCF), the probable diagnosis, and recommendations
for further testing, if any. Trainees also interpret and generate reports on
lupus inhibitor tests and correlate these results with other test results when
appropriate. Bethesda assay inhibitor tests, Protein S and Protein C assays,
and panels of hypercoagulability tests on individual patients are correlated
and interpreted by the trainees. Trainees enter their interpretations into a
computer database and then review their interpretations with the coagulation
staff before the tests are verified and signed.

Trainees are required to perform, under supervision of the laboratory
technologists, common coagulation laboratory tests and to observe some of the
more esoteric tests.

Although interviewing patients is not a mandatory part of the rotation,
trainees can electively interview patients seen in the hematology thrombosis
and hemophilia clinic under the supervision of the attending clinical
hematologist.

Hematology

_Goals and Objectives._

The fellows are involved in the review of peripheral blood smears of patients
with inherited and acquired red cell disorders and in the recommendation of
red cell enzyme assays, hemoglobin electrophoresis and other specialized
assays and tests including Heinz body preparations, reticulocyte stains and
Kleihauer Betke test.

Although the fellows do not interpret Hemoglobin electrophoresis, a
comprehensive teaching set is available for self study.

The fellows review peripheral blood smears of patients with the clinical
possibility of hemolysis and initiate hemolytic work ups where indicated. They
are involved in the interpretation of direct and indirect antiglobulin tests
and antibody panels where indicated.

Cytogenetics (integrated in Molecular Diagnostics and Cytogenetics-8 weeks)

_Goals and Objectives._

The trainees work closely with the cytogenetics staff to obtain the
appropriate clinical and pathologic data on their cases. Trainees are asked to
obtain information from the patient's chart, Special Hematology,
Immunophenotyping, Molecular Diagnostics and Surgical Pathology Laboratories
that may be related to the chromosome findings in each specific case and asked
to correlate the findings. In addition, correlation with the medical
literature via a literature search is required. The trainees are involved with
these activities and the development of the provisional interpretation. The
trainee then meets daily with the cytogenetics medical director, during which
time background theory and principles are discussed for each individual case
and the final report edited.

Trainees also observe tissue culture, banding, special staining and FISH
techniques. Trainees also participate in the clinical pathology conference
where they prepare a talk on a cytogenetics topic or interesting case from the
laboratory that includes a review of the relevant medical literature. Trainees
are also required to prepare a similar presentation for the cytogenetics
laboratory technicians. Trainees also attend a multi-disciplinary patient care
conference and participate in selected lectures in genetics given to the
graduate students in the genetics program.

Laboratory Management/Administration

Trainee education in laboratory management and laboratory information systems
is on-going throughout the program. This section of a trainee's education is
divided between formal didactic teaching and experiences on the individual
rotations. Trainees receive didactic teaching through both a course put on
three times a year by the Dean's Office for all trainees on global management
and financial issues related to the practice of medicine. The Program also has
a specific course that cycles every two years on management and health
informatics/laboratory information systems. This course meets twice monthly,
first for a didactic conference and then later in the month they review a
problem set that is distributed via the medical school website.

Trainees are educated in the cost-effective use of the laboratory on each of
their service rotations as they complete their cases and decide what
additional testing or clinical recommendations are needed. Trainees discuss
the rationale for their testing plans and additional recommendations with the
members of the clinical teams. Trainees are expected to not only provide the
clinical physicians with a diagnosis but also to be able to provide them with
the rationale for why additional testing was performed/recommended and how it
facilitates patient care in a cost-effective manner.

Trainees are instructed in personnel, budget, and regulatory agencies through
both the Dean's Office and the Department's lecture series (see above). As
opportunity presents, trainees participate in laboratory inspections, both
internal and externally. Trainees are annually instructed in laboratory safety
through a required course put on by the Dean's Office and one given by the
University's Department of Environmental Health and Safety. These conferences
include chemical risk, infectious risks, and blood and body fluid precautions.

The person responsible for ensuring that all trainees participate in
laboratory management and administration is the educational program director
for the Department of Laboratory Medicine.

Educational

Trainee teaches and monitors the proficient procurement of bone marrow
aspirates and trephine biopsies by pathology trainees, post-sophomore fellows,
and hematology/oncology/transplantation fellows when they first begin their
rotation in hematopathology. During the course of the rotation, trainee also
reviews cases with these individuals and teaches them ways to evaluate the
specimens in order to arrive at the appropriate diagnosis. Such teaching
opportunities are an integral part of trainee's "sign-out" activities.

Trainees also participate as laboratory/small group instructors for the
"Blood" section of the Systemic Pathology course (second-year medical
students).

#### Educational Information

Block diagram and concise description of the rotations/assignments for the
fellows:

First Year in Program *

  * Technical Training on Hematology and Flow Cytometry equipment
  * Bone Marrow Rotation and Lymph node
  * Coagulation Rotation and Lymph node
  * Bone Marrow Rotation and Lymph node
  * Molecular Diagnostic/ Cytogenetics Rotation and Lymph node
  * Bone Marrow Rotation and Lymph node
  * Immuno- histo- chemistry and Lymph node
  * Elective or Research Lymph node

Conferences, seminars, and journal clubs in which the fellows participate:

Name of Conference Frequency Department Responsible

Hematology Conference

Weekly Unknown slide conference

Hematopathology

Clinical Pathology Conference

Weekly

Laboratory Medicine

Hematologic Malignancy Conference

Bi-weekly

Hematopathology; Clinical Hematology/Oncology

Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Grand Rounds

Weekly (Sept-June)

Laboratory Medicine

Resident Lecture Series

Weekly

Laboratory Medicine

Cytogenetics/Molecular Diagnostics Correlation Conference

Bi-weekly

Hematopathology; Cytogenetics; Molecular Diagnostics

Didactic Hematopathology Lectures

Weekly

Hematopathology

**Fellow participation in these conferences:**

Trainee is required to attend all "unknown slides" conferences (except when
away for vacation or other previously arranged time off), at which he/she is
called upon to discuss and defend his/her differential diagnoses. These
conferences are planned and run by a hematopathology-attending physician. In
addition, trainee is also invited to contribute interesting blood, marrow,
and/or body fluid specimens and be in charge of at least part of the "unknown
slides" conferences.

Trainee is required to attend all didactic hematopathology lectures, except
when away for vacation or other previously arranged time off.

For the interdisciplinary Hematologic Malignancies Conference and the
Cytogenetic/Molecular Diagnostics Correlation Conference, trainee reviews the
relevant pathologic specimens, discusses the cases with the hematopathology-
attending physician, reviews the pertinent literature and presents the cases
at the conference. He/she also actively contributes to the discussion during
the course of the conference.

Trainees also attend and present at the department's Grand Rounds and the
Clinical Pathology Conferences.

Throughout the program, the trainee is responsible for direct communications
with the clinical services to discuss the diagnostic laboratory results and to
participate in patient management, thus fulfilling his/her role as a
laboratory consultant. To foster trainee's sense of independence while
assuring appropriate supervision it is required that trainee review with the
attending hematopathologist(s) his/her interpretations before communicating
with the clinical services, or to request that additional discussion with the
attending hematopathologist(s) be sought for follow-up.

For the interdisciplinary Hematologic Malignancies Conference, the trainee is
the primary liaison between the clinical physicians and the hematopathology
attending physician for selection of the patient cases for review. The trainee
prepares and presents the cases at the conference. He/she also actively
contributes to the discussion during the course of the conference.

**Trainee performance is evaluated and the trainee evaluates the program as follows:**

Using the E*Value electronic evaluation form, trainees are evaluated on their
knowledge, skills and professional growth at the end of each rotation (every
one - three months). Written evaluations are also obtained/prepared after
rotations outside of the program's affiliated institutions and elective
trainee-tailored specialty rotations. The trainees are provided with
continuous feedback on their performance during each rotation. In general,
only deficiencies are noted in writing and a midpoint written evaluation is
only done on a rotation in which a trainee is performing sub optimally. During
the last days of each rotation, the coordinating teaching faculty member
personally discusses their written evaluation with the trainee. Trainees are
evaluated on their performance and attainment of the rotation's goals and
objectives, demonstrated ability to provide informative consultation to the
clinical service teams, their medical knowledge, their application of this
knowledge to efficient/quality patient care, their technical and observational
skills, the effectiveness of their teaching skills, and their attendance and
participation in conferences. Trainees are also evaluated on their
interpersonal skills, professional attitudes, reliability, and ethics with
members of the teaching faculty, peers, laboratory staff, and clinicians. They
are further evaluated on their appropriate use of initiative in fostering
quality patient care and use of the medical literature. Their timely
completion of assigned interpretive reports is another component of the
evaluation. Trainees on probation receive a written mid-rotation evaluation.
In addition to the E*Value form, the trainees are asked to distribute twelve
"360 degree" evaluation forms during the fellowship period to either
laboratory technologists, laboratory technicians, residents, medical students,
clinical attending staff, clerical staff, nursing staff or patients that they
have had direct contact with. Each of these categories must be represented at
least once during the training period. The 360 degree evaluations are returned
to the Pathology Residency Program office and place in the trainee's file. The
360 degree evaluation is recommended by the Accreditation Council for Graduate
Medical Education ([www.acgme.org](http://www.acgme.org/)) as one of the
instruments for evaluating core competencies.

Trainee evaluations are immediately and continuously available to them via the
on-line E*Value system at all times. If an evaluation cannot be personally
discussed with the trainee due to unavoidable time conflicts at the end of a
rotation, a copy of the evaluation is sent to the trainee for their review.
Trainees acknowledge that their evaluation was discussed with them on their
E*Value evaluation of the rotation. At minimum, the Program Director in
Hematopathology meets with the trainee at the end of the bone marrow block to
discuss issues that they may have or anticipate with their training and/or the
overall Program. In order to facilitate improvements in the quality of our
training programs, the Program also requires the trainee to regularly complete
confidential surveys on the Program, its teaching faculty, and its individual
rotations. The Program assures trainees of an educational environment in which
they may raise and resolve issues without fear of intimidation or retaliation.

A permanent individual training file is maintained in the Department's GME
office on each trainee. This file contains their application to the Program,
human resource/contract/payroll documents, written evaluations, resume,
vacation/leave forms, and copies of all Program correspondence and copies of
case or conference presentations given by the trainee during the fellowship.
In order to preserve the integrity of the training files, a trainee or
authorized faculty member can review their training file by making an
appointment with the Program Director or Program Coordinator in the Director's
absence.

At the end of a trainee's program, the Program Director meets with the
graduating trainee to discuss their overall program performance, especially
focusing on the final aspects of their training. The Director issues each
graduating trainee an overall written summary that indicates that the trainee
has the skills necessary to practice competently and independently in the area
of hematopathology and demonstrates professional and personal attributes
dedicated to the life long learning associated with the practice of medicine.
A copy of this final evaluation is maintained in the trainee's permanent file.

How do fellows participate in the evaluation of the training program
(facilities, teaching staff, organizational structure, etc.)? Are written
evaluations of the program by the fellows reviewed and comments/suggestions
acted upon by the department? (Please attach copy of evaluation form, if
appropriate.)

Rotations and Teaching Faculty Evaluation - Trainees are required to regularly
complete electronic E*Value evaluations of their individual rotations and
teaching faculty experiences, which reflects upon the rotation's effectiveness
in meeting the written curriculum guidelines and facilitating their attainment
of the educational goals and objectives. The E*Value system ensures that all
trainees participate in the evaluation process and their anonymity.

Trainees complete a survey that reflects upon their past year of training and
limit responses to rotations personally completed within the year. When
completing the survey, trainees are asked to keep the following in mind:

  1. The purpose of graduate medical education is to provide an organized educational program with faculty guidance and supervision of trainees that facilitates the trainee's professional development, while ensuring safe and appropriate care for patients.
  2. Trainees are to be incorporated into an educational environment that is scholarly, committed to excellence in education and medical care, and fosters ethical professional development.
  3. Trainees are first and foremost students, rather than employees, and all Program activities must reflect this distinction. Trainees are to be protected, as students, with respect to their educational environment and the clinical settings in which they learn.
  4. Trainees are to be assured of an educational environment in which they may raise and resolve issues without fear of intimidation or retaliation.
  5. Trainees are required to complete for Program review confidential written evaluations of the Program's educational content and the teaching staff.

Periodically, discussions are held among the hematopathology attending
physicians and also with the laboratory technical support staff to assess the
following: proficiency of trainees with the marrow aspiration and biopsy
procedure, appropriateness and effectiveness in interactions with patients and
clinical colleagues, degree of preparedness at the "unknown slides"
conferences and didactic lectures, accuracy and efficiency at sign-out
responsibilities quality of judgment and problem solving abilities with call
responsibilities. From these discussions, "gaps" in trainees' knowledge as
well as gaps in the breadth and depth of educational activities and
supervision are identified for correction. For example, based on these
discussions lectures on hematology laboratory instrumentation and on anemia
work-up have been added to the core curriculum.

Library Facilities:

The University has a major academic library on the same campus as University
of Minnesota Medical Center, Fairview, which is open from 7 a.m. to midnight
Monday-Saturday and noon to midnight on Sunday. This library provides trainees
with librarians who assist in performing literature searches and in obtaining
journal articles and other materials not found in their holdings. A reference
book collection, teaching glass and 35mm slide sets, and CD ROMs are available
within the trainee office area. Trainees may also borrow books from faculty
members.

Research:

The fellows are encouraged to work on clinical research project with a view to
present the data at a National meeting. Travel expenses are covered for
trainees who are presenting a research paper or an abstract at a national
meeting. Fellows are given academic leave to attend local meetings such as the
Minnesota Society of Pathologists and the Bell symposium.

Computers and Informatics:

On each rotation, trainees are instructed in the use of computer information
systems that track specimens, provide results, and assist in quality
assurance. Trainees are also instructed in and frequently perform on-line
literature searches. In addition to textbook reading, trainees are expected to
locate recent articles and reviews on their assigned cases.

Daily, trainees use computer systems to assist them in tracking their assigned
cases. Trainees use computer databases in anatomic pathology to get lists of
their pending cases or newly assigned cases.

Through these databases, they use word processing software to edit and
complete their provisional drafts of surgical and autopsy reports. In
cytology, they use computer systems that facilitate report generation through
the use of standardized/coded text comments. They can also use these databases
to look up historical results on patients and identify cases with a similar
theme for group study. These systems are also used for billing and CPT coding
functions. On clinical services, trainees use laboratory information systems
to track specimens and record test results in both a manual and automated
manner. They use the computers to assist in data interpretation of testing
such as the lupus inhibitor panel. They also use patient care networks to look
up results on patients, along with clinical dictations, radiology results, and
operative reports. They can also use these databases to look up historical
results on patients and identify cases with a similar them for group study.

