---
title: Choosing Pathology as a Specialty 
layout: default
---
#  Choosing Pathology as a Specialty

#### ![ Cells, Tissues, and Disease. Principles of General Pathology.
Blackwell Science Cambridge, MA 1996
p.xii](http://residency.pathology.umn.edu/sites/default/files/tree.png)J.
Carlos Manivel, M.D.

Professor

[maniv001@umn.edu](mailto:maniv001@umn.edu;)

We all chose medicine for a variety of reasons among which, there is
invariably one: we want to know what is wrong when something is not working
well in the human body. Ideally, once we know what the problem is and how it
operates, it can be fixed or yet even better, prevented.

Simply defined, pathology is the study of disease; therefore, anybody who
chose medicine, must by definition love pathology; being in medicine and not
loving pathology is an oxymoron. Then, what is the difference between
"Pathology" as a body of knowledge and "Pathology" as a specialty?
Pathologists use that body of knowledge supported by a variety of techniques
such as microscopy, molecular biology, biochemical essays, etc, to establish
diagnoses.

Pathology has been described as the "Trunk of the Tree of Medicine" (See
figure at right). It draws knowledge from all basic sciences, which in this
allegory would represent the roots, and supports and nourishes all specialties
of clinical medicine that are represented by the branches of the tree. Simply
put, pathology provides the scientific basis for clinical medicine and a
clinical purpose for basic sciences. Its critical position between basic and
clinical sciences gives pathology unique versatility; some pathologists are
more basically oriented and do research on fundamental aspects of disease.
Their research obviously impacts patients, but in a more general sense, rather
than as applied to specific cases. On the other hand, other pathologists are
exclusively clinically oriented and their work is reflected in guiding
individual patients' treatments. Academic pathologists combine both aspects of
the practice and derive material and ideas for research and teaching from
their clinical practice.

The specialty of pathology is divided into two large areas, Laboratory
Medicine and Anatomic Pathology. The former includes all the laboratories such
as Blood Chemistry, Microbiology, Molecular Diagnostics, Transfusion Medicine,
Cytogenetics, and so on. Anatomic Pathology deals with tissues; including
biopsies, cytology and autopsies. The product of pathologists' work is
information—diagnoses—that will help guide treatment and establish prognosis.
While morphology is an important tool in our specialty and it is thrilling to
recognize diseases—and critical for patient care—the microscope is only a tool
and pattern recognition is by no means the "end goal" or only "objective" of
our practice. Its purpose is to provide information that will result in better
understanding of diseases and patient care. Every single case is an
opportunity to learn and to teach.

Since pathology is the study of diseases from all organ systems, there are no
limits to the field of our practice. We see diseases from every single organ
and system, of every conceivable nature: congenital, acquired, neoplastic,
benign, malignant, metabolic, infectious, degenerative, etc. and we interact
with every single clinical specialist. The variety and opportunities are
simply limitless and make for a very interesting and intellectually
challenging and rewarding practice. The "revolution in biology" that started a
few years ago has resulted in an explosive gain in knowledge; it has been
achieved in great part through the study of tissues with techniques of
molecular biology. Since pathologists work with tissues, they are in a very
strategic and privileged position to generate this knowledge and interact with
basic scientists and clinical specialists. We are only at the beginning of
this exciting revolution in medicine. There is much more to come and the
future is very promising. Pathology is a good place to be in, if you want to
be an active participant.

Pathologists are often referred to as "the Doctor's Doctor". Why? When someone
has a health problem, he or she goes to see a doctor; and when the doctor has
a problem in establishing a diagnosis, he or she goes to the pathologist in
search of help. In other words, the pathologist acts as a consultant. The
pathologist is an important member of the clinical team; simply put, how the
patient will be treated and what the outcome will be depend on the
pathologist's diagnosis. As a corollary, the pathologist does not treat
patients directly, but deals with other members of the clinical team. This
provides interactions that are intellectually very rewarding and a continuous
source of learning.

Electives: We have three, four and six week elective rotations for medical
students in Anatomic Pathology. If you take one of these electives, you will
get first-hand exposure to what we do in clinical practice. If you are
interested in other specialty, your goals for this rotation should be to
become familiar with the pathology of your specialty and to know how the
pathologist can help you treat your patients. If you are curious about
becoming a pathologist, these rotations will provide you with the necessary
experience to make a good choice. I am not going to recommend you to "do
pathology"; and I am not going to tell you that "pathology is the best
specialty". You will choose your own specialty and there is no "best
specialty" for everyone. Without a doubt, the best specialty for you is simply
the one that best fits your aspirations; we need good people in all
disciplines.

Whether you have chosen to become a pathologist, or are considering this
possibility, you should give yourself an opportunity to learn why we are so
excited about our specialty!

