---
title: Cytopathology Fellowship
layout: default
published: true
categories: fellowships
---

#  Cytopathology Fellowship

### ![]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/cyto1.jpg)Program Director

[Hannah Krigman, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/krigman/)

### Introduction

The Cytopathology Fellowship at the University of Minnesota Medical School is
a one year ACGME accredited training program. Cytopathology fellows work
closely with faculty at four different sites, University of Minnesota Medical
Center, Hennepin County Medical Center, Abbott Northwestern and United
Hospital. This diversity of training allows fellows to experience a full range
of cytology and fine needle aspiration. The procedure for work-up of cases
varies with the type of case. Gynecologic cases are prepared and screened by
staff cytotechnologists. The fellow works closely with the cytopathology staff
in signing out these slides.

Interactions between the cytopathology fellow and services devoted to
necropsy, clinical pathology, and surgical pathology are most commonly based
on follow-up of patients who have been previously studies by cytologic means.
Staging of malignancies initially diagnosed in histologic biopsies is often
addressed by fine needle aspiration. In the setting of certain types of
disease, cytologic specimens are collected for cytogenetic, immunophenotypic,
flow cytometric, or hormone receptor analysis. Communication with the
laboratories responsible for these studies is an important component of
complete evaluation of some cytology cases. Follow-up of cytology cases in
surgical pathology is a daily activity, as a part of quality control, and in
preparation of teaching sets. Both of these are important areas of activity
for the fellow.

As the fellow gains experience, the teaching responsibilities increase. This
includes supervision of residents in case preparation and evaluation, as well
as introducing residents to the technique of fine needle aspiration. In the
second one-half of the year, there is ample opportunity to engage in formal
teaching of cytotechnology students and pathology residents. In the second
one-half of the training program, the fellow has primary sign-out privileges.
Non-gynecologic, non-aspiration cases are addressed in a similar manner. Fine
needle aspirations of palpable masses are performed by the fellow, following
several months of supervised activity in this field. Preparation of smears,
application of the initial rapid stain, and communication of rapid diagnoses
are all accomplished by the fellow.

Radiographically guided aspirations of deep masses are attended by the fellow,
who prepares the smears, applies a rapid stain and gives a preliminary
interpretation of specimen adequacy. Based on the diagnostic possibilities
suggested by the combined clinical radiographic and rapid cytologic findings,
the fellow makes decisions about specimen allocation to the various media
required for cell blocks, electron microscopy, immunocytochemistry,
cytogenetics, flow cytometry, and microbiologic culture.

In all cases, the patient's previous pathology and cytology specimens are
available for review. The current clinical history is considered as the case
is evaluated. Frequent contact with the physicians on clinical services
insures rapid and accurate correlation of all pertinent information. As the
fellow prepares and evaluates cases in the manner just described, the
cytopathology staff is available for consultation. This includes bedside
assistance with difficult aspirations. Regularly scheduled conferences insure
that all significant abnormal findings are ultimately seen by several
individuals at all levels of the service. This insures both high-quality
teaching, and constant review of diagnostic patient material.

During interactions with the clinical staff, the fellow is encouraged to take
an active role, not only in obtaining detailed information about material
currently being studied, but in educating other physicians about applications
of cytology and its advantages in specific situations. This includes
recognizing situations in which cytologic evaluations (particularly fine
needle aspiration) are not appropriate. This exchange of information occurs
informally as cases are discussed at the microscope, in written form through
results reporting, and in multidisciplinary patient-care conferences.

#### ![](https://residency.pathology.umn.edu/modules/file/icons/application-
pdf.png) [General Goals & Objectives](../sites/default/files/Cytopathology-
Goals-and-Objectives-General.pdf)

### Rotation-Specific Goals & Objectives

  * ##### ![](https://residency.pathology.umn.edu/modules/file/icons/application-pdf.png) [University of Minnesota Medical Center](../sites/default/files/Cytopathology-Goals-and-Objectives-UMMC.pdf)

  * ##### ![](https://residency.pathology.umn.edu/modules/file/icons/application-pdf.png) [Abbott Northwestern Hospital](../sites/default/files/Cytopathology-Goals-and-Objectives-ANW.pdf)

  * ##### ![](https://residency.pathology.umn.edu/modules/file/icons/application-pdf.png) [Hennepin County Medical Center](../sites/default/files/Cytopathology-Goals-and-Objectives-HCMC.pdf)

  * ##### ![](https://residency.pathology.umn.edu/modules/file/icons/application-pdf.png) [United Hospital](../sites/default/files/Cytopathology-Goals-and-Objectives-UNITED.pdf)
