---
title: Applying to Fellowship and Advanced Specialty Training Programs 
layout: default
---
#  Applying to Fellowship and Advanced Specialty Training Programs

[x](../prospective_fellows/applying.1#)

## Status message

Oops, looks like this request tried to create an infinite loop. We do not
allow such things here. We are a professional website!

Physicians interested in pursuing advanced training in laboratory medicine and
pathology will need to submit a completed
![](http://residency.pathology.umn.edu/modules/file/icons/application-
pdf.png)[Fellowship Application Form](http://residency.pathology.umn.edu/sites
/default/files/Fellowship_Application_Form.pdf), a letter of inquiry and all
supporting documentation indicated below. The letter of inquiry should include
the name of the fellowship program and a brief overview of the applicant's
interests, related prior experiences, and long-term career goals.

_Complete applications must be received no later than September 1 for
positions beginning July 1 of the following year._

_Applications for the [Hematopathology Fellowship Program](3503) should be
received no later than January 1 for positions beginning July 1 of the
following year._

_[Blood Banking and Transfusion Medicine Fellowship](3500) suggests applying
early as applications are accepted on a rolling basis. The application
deadline is 03/31 for Fellowships beginning the same year._

Only complete applications are reviewed for possible interviews. Complete
applications consist of the Department's fellowship application form,
Curriculum Vitae, United States Medical Licensing Examination results (parts
1, 2, and 3), and three letters of recommendation. These letters should be
from the applicant's current/most recent program director and two other
physicians who know the applicant well. International medical graduates must
also submit a copy of their valid ECFMG certificate and be eligible for a J-1
visa, if necessary.

Direct inquires to:

Jennifer McDaniel

GME Program Administrator

Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology

University of Minnesota Medical School

420 Delaware St. SE/MMC 609

Minneapolis, MN 55455

Fax: (612) 625-3976

[jenmcdan@umn.edu](mailto:jenmcdan@umn.edu)

