---
title: Prospective Fellows 
layout: default
---
#  Prospective Fellows

![](http://residency.pathology.umn.edu/sites/default/files/styles/large/public
/Graduation%20and%20Fellows%20006.jpg?itok=lYTPyML3)The Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology fellowship programs offer advanced training
in different areas of anatomic and clinical pathology. Fellows have
responsibilities that are intermediate between those of a resident and a staff
pathologist. They are supervised as necessary by staff pathologists, who
approve and sign all diagnoses. However, they have considerable freedom in
working up cases, and elaborating preliminary diagnoses before the cases are
reviewed and discussed with the staff pathologists. Fellows gain considerable
experience in interacting as a consultant and discussing cases with clinical
and surgical colleagues. Additional training is provided through intra- and
interdepartmental conferences for which fellows are responsible. Fellows also
attend intradepartmental teaching conferences and interdepartmental
conferences, according to the specialty.

Another important aspect of fellows' teaching consists of
administrative/supervisory skills. Fellows assist in the teaching and
supervision of junior residents. They do not compete for cases with residents;
rather, they interact with residents in the work-up of the cases; it is an
interaction that benefits both fellows and residents. Through interactions
with technical and administrative personnel in the different laboratories,
fellows gain considerable experience in lab management. Finally, fellows are
strongly encouraged to participate in research projects with faculty members;
the department provides all the necessary support for carrying out the
projects, presenting the results at meetings and publishing the manuscripts.

The general goal of the fellowship programs is to instill expertise in
different areas of anatomic and clinical pathology, ensuring trainees that
will become leaders in their field and who will excel either in community
practice or in academic pathology. Fellowships provide the credits for
subspecialty board certification examinations, where applicable.

* * *

### Fellowships

  * [Blood Banking and Transfusion Medicine Fellowship](3500)
  * [Clinical Cytogenetics Fellowship](3501)
  * [Clinical Chemistry Fellowship](http://www.comacc.org/training/Pages/minnesota.aspx)
  * [Cytopathology Fellowship](3502)
  * Forensic Pathology Fellowship
  * [Hematopathology Fellowship](3503)
  * [Molecular Genetic Pathology Fellowship](19)
  * [Surgical Pathology Fellowship](3504)

* * *

[Applying to Lab Medicine and Pathology Fellowship
Programs](../prospective_fellows/applying.1)

  * [Minimal Requirements for Fellowship Program Applicants](3497)
  * [Interviewing](3936)
  * [Applicant Selection](http://residency.pathology.umn.edu/node/3498)

[Life in the Twin Cities](http://umn.edu/wishyouwerehere/)

