---
title: Molecular Genetic Pathology 
layout: default
---
#  Molecular Genetic Pathology

![](http://residency.pathology.umn.edu/sites/default/files/styles/large/public
/test_tubes.jpg?itok=JHucTND-)Molecular Genetic Pathology (MGP) Training
Program at University of Minnesota Medical Center (UMMC) is an ACGME
accredited one-year fellowship. This MGP program is designed to train
pathologists to be an expert in molecular diagnosis. The MGP graduate will be
in excellence to provide comprehensive diagnostic, management and counseling
services for inherited diseases and the genetic factors pertinent to all
diseases.

Trainees will refine their skills in laboratory management, quality assurance
and quality control. Trainees will constantly involve and become a critical
player in the development, validation and implementation of new tests. The
training experience also emphasizes the role of research in molecular
pathology so that trainees can pursue investigator-initiated research upon
completion of the program. The UMMC Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory is the
home base of this program. The molecular lab currently provides 45 clinical
molecular tests. Its test menu covers broad inherited diseases, hematological
disorders, and solid tumors. MGP fellows will learn and master the molecular
techniques including DNA and RNA extraction, Southern blot, variety PCR
amplification methods including sequencing, methylation specific PCR and real-
time PCR. These technologies are applied in a wide spectrum of clinical tests
in cancer, inherited disease, infectious disease, and identification. Fellows
will learn to analyze and interpret molecular data from clinical cases, and to
compose diagnostic reports. Fellows will engage in correlations with clinical,
morphologic, immunophenotypic, and cytogenetic findings. Fellows will be
exposed to lab administration procedures, such as QA&QC, CAP surveys, test
development, and ethical issues related to clinical service and research in
molecular pathology. Fellows will learn to design and carry out research
projects aimed at understanding the molecular basis of diseases or translating
such basic discoveries into improved patient care. Departmental Research Fund
is available for every fellow.

## Teaching Faculty

### Principal Supervisor

[Michelle Dolan, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/dolan/), Program
Director, Molecular Genetic Pathology

### Molecular Genetic Pathology Teaching Faculty

Drs. [Michelle Dolan](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/dolan/), Kirk
Ramen, [Anthony Killeen](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/killeen/),
[Mike Tsai](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/tsai/), [Betsy
Hirsch](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/hirsch/), Lisa Schementti, John
Day, Matthew Bowler, Mary Ahreng, [Carlos
Manivel](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/manivel/), Richard King

## Teaching Facilities

University of Minnesota Medical Center, Fairview, University Campus

## Requirements

In addition to the general Program requirements, three years of approved
straight CP, three years of approved straight AP or four years of approved
combined AP/CP residency training is required at the time of matriculation,
including experience in molecular genetics laboratories.

## Program Details

The MGP program is a one year program for pathologist who has finished
residency training. The MPG Program is designed to train pathologist to
provide comprehensive diagnostic, management and counseling services for
inherited diseases and the genetic factors pertinent to all diseases. If the
fellow has had medical genetics residency training, an anatomic/surgical
pathology rotation will substitute the genetic clinical training. If the
fellow has had CP only training, an anatomic/surgical pathology rotation will
substitute the cytogenetics and biochemical genetics lab rotation.

**Fellow's Activities in MGP Program**  
(12 months)

![](http://residency.pathology.umn.edu/sites/default/files/mgp_activities.gif)

#### Required Rotations/Assignments

  * **Experiential:**
    * MDL - 12 months
    * Genetics Outpatient Clinic - 4 weeks
    * Genetics Consult Service - 2 weeks
    * Prenatal Service - 2 weeks
    * Cytogenetics, Biochemical Genetics - 8 weeks
    * (Anatomic and Surgical Pathology) - (8 weeks)
  * **Didactic:**
    * Clinical Pathology Conference - 1 hr/week
    * Clinical Pathology Journal club - 1 hr/month
    * Pathology Grand Round - 1 hr/week
    * Genetics Research Club - 1 hr/week
    * Metabolic Genetics Monthly Conference - 1 hr/month
    * Hematological Malignancy Conference - 1 hr/week

### Goals and objectives for each rotation

Genetics Outpatient Clinic:

  1. Efficient collect historical and laboratory data in diagnosis.
  2. Execute a diagnostic and management plan in the outpatient setting.
  3. Describe the natural history of genetic disorders.
  4. Experience the psychological impact of genetic disorders.
  5. Exposure to clinical practice issues.
  6. Experience in special management of patients with skeletal dysplasias, inherited cancer syndromes, Cystic Fibrosis, muscular dystrophies, and others.
  7. Function as part of a multidisciplinary team caring for patients with genetic disorders.

Genetics Consult Service:

  1. Experience the diagnosis and management of genetic conditions in patients of all ages.
  2. Experience in evaluating the contribution of genetic factors to a variety of common diseases.
  3. Be capable in communicating efficiently with caregivers in other disciplines.

Prenatal Service:

  1. Be capable in counseling for genetic risk
  2. Experience in the diagnosis and counseling of deformation and teratogenic disorders.
  3. Knowledge of the population frequency and natural history of a variety of inherited disorders
  4. Experience with population screening programs for genetic and malformation conditions
  5. Knowledge of in utero techniques for prenatal diagnosis

Cytogenetics and Biochemical Genetics Lab:

  1. Experience the operation of a clinical cytogenetics and biochemical laboratory
  2. Understand the appropriateness, limitations and costs of the diagnostic tests used in each laboratory.
  3. Understand current standardized international nomenclature for chromosomal aberrations.
  4. Be familiar with techniques used for screening biochemical and cytogenetic disorders.
  5. Understand the process of transitioning new discoveries to clinical application

Anatomic Pathology:

Fellows with no training in AP/SP are required to gain experience and skill in
autopsy. Each fellow will participate at least five supervised procedures.
Pathologist Attendings will be responsible for teaching the procedure.

Surgical Pathology:

Fellows with no training in AP/SP are required to gain experience and skill in
surgical pathology. Each fellow will perform at least five supervised
procedures. Pathologist Attendings will be responsible for teaching the
procedure and directly supervising the performance of each biopsy.

### Evaluations

The Fellow will be evaluated from appropriate teaching faculty after each
rotation via the E*Value System. Annual evaluations are sent to the Fellow to
complete on the program via E*Value and an annual meeting including key
teaching faculty is held to review the program and improve the program based
on information received from the evaluation.

Fellows are required to regularly complete electronic E*Value evaluations of
their individual rotations and teaching faculty experiences, which reflects
upon the rotation's effectiveness in meeting the written curriculum guidelines
and facilitating their attainment of the educational goals and objectives. The
E*Value system ensures that all fellows participate in the evaluation process
and their anonymity is protected by incorporating the MGP evaluations into the
LMP residency program results.

#### Goals and Objectives for Molecular Diagnosis

Knowledge:

The clinical features, other laboratory results, and prognosis that exemplify:

  1. Mendelian (e.g. single gene disorders)
  2. Non-mendelian/complex (e.g. triplet repeat expansion disorders/multiple gene common disorders)
  3. Somatic (e.g. cancer syndromes)
  4. Chromosomal etiologies

Skills in Result Interpretation:

  1. Interpret laboratory tests, imaging studies, and specialized genetic studies relevant to diagnosis
  2. Assemble an appropriate diagnosis by correlation with clinical and other laboratory evidences
  3. Obtain up-to-date information on clinical conditions from a variety of information resources (OMIM, GeneClinics, NCBI etc.) to aid the process of diagnosis, management, counseling and research.
  4. Incorporate knowledge regarding heterogeneity, variability, penetrance, and natural history in patient management
  5. Calculate and explain genetic risk (such as experience on risk modification by Bayesian analysis)
  6. Counsel clinicians about the correlation between molecular defects and clinical symptoms
  7. Presenting cases in which he/she is involved at data/case review conferences held by the laboratory and/or department.

Clinical Laboratory Operation:

  1. In-depth understanding of the operation of a clinical molecular genetics laboratory
  2. Competency in the appropriateness, limitations and costs of the diagnostic tests used in the laboratory.
  3. Competency in techniques used for screening and diagnosing single gene disorders.
  4. Comprehensive understanding of standardized international nomenclature for mutations.
  5. Experience in the process of transitioning new discoveries to clinical application.
  6. Knowledge of literature and web-based (e.g. Gene Tests) resources to facilitate the selection of diagnostic tests.
  7. Competency in the interpretation of results and generation of reports.
  8. Experience in the oral delivery of results to clients and response to inquiries regarding result interpretation.

The goals in investigator-initiated research:

  1. Define a research question and design a strategy to answer it.
  2. Choose appropriate techniques and critically evaluate results.
  3. Participate in bench work for the experiments designed
  4. Review and evaluate existing literature in the process of writing a research paper


