---
title: Prospective Residents
layout: default
published: true
---

#  Prospective Residents

### Training Programs & Graduation Requirements
![frozen_section.jpg](/images/frozen_section.jpg)
The Department provides four years of combined anatomic & clinical and three
years of anatomic or clinical pathology only residency training to its
physicians-in-training who continually make successful academic progress
towards the independent practice of laboratory medicine and pathology. In
order to ensure uniform basic training, combined anatomic & clinical and
anatomic or clinical pathology only trainees must successfully complete the
appropriate core anatomic and/or clinical pathology rotation series to
graduate from the Program (see below).

In addition to the rotation requirements, all combined anatomic & clinical and
anatomic only trainees must successfully complete 50 autopsies in accordance
with the Program's autopsy policies by the time of graduation. Trainees are
also required to satisfactorily present a formal 45 minute Departmental Grand
Rounds on a current topic of pathology or a research project they completed.
While not mandatory, trainees are highly encouraged to participate in clinical
and/or basic pathology related research. Residents, with the assistance of a
laboratory medicine and pathology mentor, may apply for Department sponsored
funds to help partially cover the cost of their project and travel to present
their research at a national meeting (See the [Residency Policy Manual:
Trainee Research Fund and Presenting Research at National Conferences on page 
10]({{site.baseurl}}/files/policy_manuals/LMP_Residency_Policy_Manual.pdf#page=11)).

#### Combined Anatomic and Clinical Pathology Graduation Requirements - Four Year Training Program

**Eighteen months of [Anatomic Pathology Core Requirements](rotations/ap/)**

  * 12 months of surgical pathology and autopsy pathology
  * 3 months of cytopathology
  * 1 month of forensic pathology
  * 1 month of renal pathology
  * 1 month of anatomic elective

**Eighteen months of [Clinical Pathology Core Requirements](rotations/cp/)**

During the first two years residents will have CP rotations which expose them
to all of the CP disiplines. These rotations will include:

  * 2 months of clinical chemistry
  * 2 months of microbiology
  * 3 months of transfusion medicine and coagulation
  * 3 months of hematology
  * 2 months of cytogentics and basic molecular pathology

During the last two years residents will be required to have 6 months and
strongly encouraged to have at least 8 months of advanced CP rotations. During
these advanced rotations, they will be required to have:

  * 1 month chemistry
  * 1 month microbiology
  * 1 month hematology
  * 1 month transfusion medicine

The rest of the rotations can be chosen from a large list of advanced CP
rotations, all of which have an extensive clinical component.

**12 Months of Flexible Training**

This training year is designed to provide directed and focused training in
preparation for graduation. Such training may include:

  * Up to 6 months of research directed at issues related to laboratory medicine and pathology. Residents must submit a written proposal to the R.A.F.T. Committee regarding the composition of this research for approval. This proposal must be submitted at least 6 months before the start of the 4th year.
  * Advanced elective rotations in anatomic or clinical pathology.

Electives can be taken at any point starting in the second year

#### Anatomic or Clinical Pathology Only - _Three Year Training Program_

Completion of the corresponding two year anatomic or clinical pathology core
requirements, and a year of approved pathology research or advanced rotations
relating to the specific discipline as described above.