---
title: Laboratory Management and Informatics Course 
layout: default
---
#  Laboratory Management and Informatics Course

![](../sites/default/files/styles/medium/public/ummcf1.jpg?itok=_wH2wECz)Most
pathologists will be called on to manage important clinical resources. The
increasing complexity and competitiveness of the healthcare environment
demands effective management by all those responsible for deploying resources.
There is a broad consensus that training in management skills should be a part
of the training of pathologists. Similarly because of demands for increasingly
effective communication of pathology's primary product, information,
pathologists must possess communication skills and be familiar with modern
means for collecting, storing, and disseminating clinical information is
support of patient care and education of professional colleagues.

Principles of management and informatics are challenging to convey to
residents and fellows who are dealing with the urgency and workload related to
patient care. In addition, because of a lack of prior exposure, many residents
find it difficult to put the principles covered into a structured whole that
can be remembered and applied. Therefore, in the rotation emphasis is placed
on bringing in community pathologists as models of pathologists actively
involved in management and informatics issues. To provide an opportunity for
immediate application of these principles as they are covered, residents and
fellows work together to solve relevant but synthetic problem sets.

  * Coordinating Teaching Faculty Member  
[Anthony Killeen, M.D.,
Ph.D.](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/killeen/)

This rotation is co-sponsored by the two pathology residency programs in the
State of Minnesota. The other co-coordinator is [George Klee, MD,
PhD](http://www.mayoclinic.org/bio/10225781.html) at the Mayo Clinic.

  * Teaching Faculty Members  
This rotation draws from the ranks of academic and community pathologists
practicing in the Twin Cities and greater Minnesota. On occasion an expert
from outside the state is invited to present the months topic. A listing of
recent faculty is maintained at the above web site.

  * Training Site:  
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis Campus

  * Duration of Rotation:  
Two monthly meetings over 9 months each year. Course runs on a two year cycle.

  * Post Graduate Level of Residents Involved  
PGY 1-5

#### Overview of Daily Duties and Responsibilities:

Residents attend a monthly live teleconference which is focused on a single
management or informatics theme. Residents monitor the rotation's web site for
supplemental materials, including the monthly problem set. The residents
develop responses to the problem sets over the next two weeks, preferably by
working together in small groups. At the end of the month, residents attend a
monthly follow up session and participate in the discussion of the problems
sets and related issues taking place in the local setting. Residents are also
expected to read supplemental materials and articles provided.

Teleconferencing is used so that each set of residents spend the bulk of their
time at their home location.

#### Goals and Objectives:

  1. Appreciate that the role of management in a pathologist's professional work life is important and deservng of continuous involvement and learning.
  2. Become familiar with key management knowledge that can facilitate and guide learning activities.
  3. Know the basic skill sets associated with personal leadership and group leadership.
  4. Understand one's own areas of strength and weakness in terms of leadership.
  5. Cost out a procedure or test.
  6. Be familiar with workload measurement and planning.
  7. Develop a strategy for finding a job
  8. Use a web-based knowledge resource compendium for clinical and other professional work.
  9. Understand the purpose of lab accreditation and become familiar with CAP criteria.

#### Structured Formal Education in Management and Informatics:

Once a month, residents and fellows meet for a Management/Informatics
teleconference which originates in either the Twin Cities at the University or
Mayo Clinic. The teleconference introduces a pathologist or other health care
worker with relevant expertise on a management or informatics topic. The
discussant provides an overview of the role of management skills in that
individual's career followed by a presentation focused on a management or
informatics theme. Questions and discussion ensue. The teleconference is
supplemented with a handout of related materials.

Residents and fellow are also responsible for monitoring the rotation's web
page, where the problem set for the month is posted. Participants are
encouraged to work in small teams when dealing with the problem sets. Two
weeks after the teleconference and after having an opportunity to work with
the problem set, the residents and fellow at each site meet with rotation
faculty to discuss the problems and cases for that month as well as to discuss
any current management issues of interest.

#### Required Conference/Seminars:

Attendance at every session is not expected because the rotation is spread
over two years. A standard of 70% attendance has been set to allow for such
issues as vacations and travel to special/national conferences.

#### Scholarly Activities and Research During and After Rotation:

Related papers recently published in peer-reviewed journals are occasionally
noted on the web site. This has not been a major component of the rotation.
Residents projects do require them to seek out information on the web and from
other sources. The residents are responsible for maintaining a listing of
relevant sites that they have located on the World Wide Web.

#### Method of Resident Evaluation:

Attendance of at least 70% of the monthly meetings and the quality of
participation in the monthly follow-up sessions are the most important
components of residents evaluation. Residents are expected to complete on full
cycle of this rotation in order to graduate. Residents who do not attend 70%
of a two years cycle and participate in the problem sets must make up the
entire course during the next cycle in order to graduate.

Residents are also evaluated on their interpersonal skills, professional
attitudes, reliability, and ethics with members of the teaching faculty,
peers, and laboratory staff. They are further evaluated on their initiative in
useing the medical literature, as it relates to their assigned cases. Their
timely completion of assigned interpretive reports is another component of the
evaluation.

#### Educational Resources Available:

The campus's Biomedical Library and Wilson Library are repositories of many
relevant books and periodicals. The Carlson School of Management provides a
rich array of management courses. The course's web site provides convenient
access to a plethora of related web sites.

#### Computer Information Systems for Resident Education and Service Duties:

The Department's web serve is used to house the course's web site. Many PC
workstations connected to the University's high-speed network backbone are
available throughout the medical school complex. Ready to access to this
network is available from home.

