---
title: Advanced Cytopathology at Hennepin County Medical Center 
layout: default
categories:
- rotations
- ap
- elective
---
#  Advanced Cytopathology at Hennepin County Medical Center

![](../sites/default/files/styles/medium/public/hcmc2.jpg?itok=ZuZ_yG-V)Advanc
ed cytopathology at Hennepin County Medical Center encompasses a similar
structure and content as the basic resident cytopathology rotations. As with
any morphologic specialty, advanced training equates with seeing more cases
which increases ones familiarity with the spectrum of morphologic variation
seen for a specific disease/tumor and opportunity to see more rare and unusual
cases. Towards this goal, this rotation is centered on seeing cases, current
and historical. It also continues to promote the resident's fine needle
aspiration training and skills. This rotation also includes more opportunities
to educate our clinical colleagues to the possibilities and advantages of
cytologic evaluations, as well as realizing the full application of newer
diagnostic modalities to cytologic material.

The laboratory's philosophy features an active, interventional stance for the
modern cytopathologist through performing aspirations in the clinic,
participating in radiographically directed aspirations, and acting as a
consultant to the clinical staff.

In the setting of certain types of disease, cytologic specimens are collected
for cytogenetic, immunophenotypic, flow cytometric, or hormone receptor
analysis. Residents on this rotation should gain a deeper understanding of the
role of the laboratories responsible for these studies as an important
component of complete evaluation of some cytology cases. Follow-up of cytology
cases in surgical pathology is a daily activity, as a part of quality control,
and in preparation of teaching sets.

  * Institutional Site Director  
Stuart E.H. Cameron, MD

  * Coordinating Teaching Faculty Member  
Steven M. Debol, MD, PhD, Phone: 612-873-5669

  * Teaching Faculty Members  
Stuart E.H. Cameron, MD

Gretchen S. Crary, MD

Steven M. Debol, MD, PhD

Bradley M. Linzie, MD

  * Lead Technical and Clerical Personnel  
Barb Kiesner, Teaching and administrative areas

Mary Greene, Teaching in preparatory area

Andrew Topp, Teaching in preparatory area

Hilda Rosai, Multiheaded microscope review of interesting cases

  * Training Site:  
Hennepin County Medical Center - Lower Level, North Block

  * Duration of Rotation:  
One month

  * Post Graduate Level of Residents Involved  
PGY 4-5

#### Supervisory Guidelines for Patient Care and Specimen Handling

_Patient procedures (Fine Needle Aspiration):_ Residents assist in/perform all
fine needle aspiration procedures performed by the Cytology service. This
includes bedside aspirations of palpable lesions, as well as radiology-
performed aspirations of deep seeded lesion with CT or ultrasound guidance. In
all cases, a rapid stain is performed and an immediate assessment of specimen
adequacy or diagnosis is rendered. Residents on this rotation will have
satisfactorily completed all three months of basic cytopathology prior to
taking this rotation; therefore, they should possess basic competence in fine
needle aspiration and smear preparation. The teaching faculty will reobserve
their technique at the beginning of the rotation to ensure continued
competence.

_Supervision for direct resident decision making in the laboratory:_ In
cytopathology, the major decisions that must be made center around selection
of specimen processing modalities or submission of special samples for various
ancillary studies. Residents, students, technologists, and the faculty discuss
these issues in a case by case basis. Emphasis is placed in generating the
greatest amount of clinically useful information. This features cost effective
and efficient use of ancillary techniques and timely results reporting.

#### Overview of Daily Duties and Responsibilities

  1. Be available during the day to perform fine needle aspirations on short notice
  2. Review all current fine needle aspirations and formulate a differential diagnosis
  3. Contact clinicians and review electronic medical records for pertinent history
  4. Discuss diagnoses with clinicians and demonstrate microscopic findings if requested
  5. Review all current non-gynecologic material
  6. Use the glass slide study sets, organize studies by organ system.
  7. Follow-up on subsequent surgical specimens and contribute cases of interest to the study set.
  8. Attend weekly anatomic pathology conferences and present conference one time/month.
  9. Review abnormal pap smears from current clinical material and screen slides each day, asking questions to clarify findings or diagnoses which you don't understand.
  10. Review the cervical cytology glass study set slides, asking questions to clarify findings and diagnoses you don't understand.

In cytopathology, the primary opportunity for graded responsibility occurs as
residents acquire greater skill and experience with fine needle aspiration.
While the current regulatory environment requires that the faculty by in
attendance at these procedures, residents are allowed greater freedom in
selecting sites for aspiration, performing the procedure, and preparing the
material as their experience increases.

Gynecologic cytology reports are generated largely by pre-established computer
codes, so that familiarity with the Bethesda system and with the range of
codes available in our computer system constitutes report generating
capability for the resident. In fine needle aspirations, a surgical pathology-
style report is generated which describes the patient's condition, the details
of procedure performance, the type of slides prepared, the microscopic
findings, and a diagnosis with any qualifying comments. These reports are
generated by residents who enter the findings prior to review by the faculty
and are either amended with the resident or signed out as necessary.

The laboratory and its educational missions are hierarchically structured.
This ascends from the students of cytotechnology, through staff
cytotechnologists, the supervisory cytotechnologist, resident physicians in
pathology, the cytopathology fellow, general anatomic pathologists, and
subspecialty-certified cytopathologists. The cytopathology resident will work
closely with trainees in the general pathology program. This includes
opportunities for teaching at the microscope, as well as bedside
demonstrations at the time of fine needle aspirations, a leadership role in
conferences, and formal didactic exercises offered both to residents and to
students of cytotechnology. Interactions with other clinical residents occurs
in the conference setting and during investigation of specific patient
problems.

Residents and fellows work closely together on the service. An effort is made
to minimize the extent to which one dilutes the experience of the other.
Careful coordination of schedules is the approach taken to this philosophy.
Experienced fellows provide considerable teaching of residents. This includes
technical matters as discussed previously, as well as description of cases at
the microscope. Fellows take a strong supervisory role. These individuals are
usually more advanced in their general anatomic pathology training than most
residents. Thus, they provide a valuable educational resource for the
residents. Residents are given less freedom in performing fine needle
aspirations than are fellows. This is especially true later in the year when
fellows have acquired considerable hands-on clinical experience.

#### Goals and Objectives

Non-Gynecologic Cytology

Goals: To learn to accurately diagnose non-gynecologic cytology specimens, and
develop an appreciation for the clinical significance of the findings.

Objectives: After completing the rotation, the resident should be able to
accurately diagnose and describe appropriate processing for the following:

  1. Body fluids  

    1. Pleural
    2. Peritoneal
    3. CSF
    4. Breast secretion
    5. Cyst fluid from ovary, kidney and breast
    6. Pericardial
    7. Synovial
  2. Urine  

    1. Reactive changes in instrumented and non-instrumented samples
    2. Low and high grade transitional cell carcinoma
    3. Viral changes
  3. Pulmonary specimens (BAL, sputum, washes, brushings)  

    1. Small cell and non-small cell carcinoma
    2. Viral changes
    3. Fungus
    4. Pneumocystic
    5. Other parasites

Gynecologic Cervical Cytology

Goals: Learn to accurately diagnose cervical cytology specimens and understand
the clinical significance of cervical cytology findings.

Objectives: Upon completion of this rotation, residents should be able to:

  1. Stain a slide using pap stain:  

    1. Explain the cellular fixatives which can be used for the pap stain
    2. Explain the value of the hematoxylin, OG and EA dyes
    3. Explain regressive and progressive staining methods
  2. Explain the CLIA '99 regulations as they apply to gyn cytology laboratories.
  3. Know the Bethesda nomenclature system for gyn cytology, and be able to describe similarities and differences to previous nomenclature systems (CIN I, CIN II, and Cin III, and Pap numerical classification).
  4. Define what constitues an adequate pap smear according to the Bethesda system.
  5. Describe and recognize the normal cellular elements in the cervical smear:  

    1. Describe the signifance of normal endometrial cells in the cervical smear
    2. Recognize "exodus"
    3. Describe the signifance of navicular cells, decidual cells, trophoblastic cells, and Arias-Stella cells
    4. Describe the significance of histiocytes
    5. Recognize spermatozoa, know how a pap smear is handled for forensic purposes, and when sperm should be reported
  6. Recognize and describe the diagnostic patterns in hormonal cytology:  

    1. Describe how a smear should be taken for hormonal evaluation
    2. Describe the commonly used indices (KPI and MI)
    3. Describe the expected patterns associated with  

      1. Menstrual cycle
      2. Prepuberty
      3. Pregnancy
      4. Postpartum
      5. Post menopause
    4. Describe when the estrogen proliferation test is useful and tell how it should be done
  7. Recognize common infections which can be diagnosed by pap smear, and describe in general terms the snesitivity, specificity and clinical significance of the specific diagnoses:  

    1. Bacterial vaginoses, including Gardnerella
    2. Actinomyces
    3. Leptothrix
    4. Herpes simplex
    5. Chlamydia
    6. Candida
    7. Trichomonas
  8. Recognize benign cellular changes associated with the following:  

    1. Acute inflammation
    2. Repair
    3. Hyperkeratosis
    4. Folic acid deficiency
    5. Intrauterine device
    6. Follicular cervicitis
    7. Radiation effect
    8. Atrophic cervicitis
    9. Tubular metaplasia of endocervical cells
  9. Recognize and describe the cytologic features diagnostic of HPV infection.  

    1. Discuss the prevalence of HPV infection revealed by different assays
    2. Discuss the association of specific HPV strains with neoplasia
  10. Recognize and describe preneoplastic changes of squamous cells in terms of nuclear size and contour, chromatin pattern, cytoplasm, cell size and cell number, and smear background.  

    1. Atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance
    2. Low grade squamous intraepithelial lesions
    3. High grade squamous intraepithelial lesions
    4. Microinvasive carcinoma
    5. Invasive carcinoma
  11. Describe and identify the cytologic features of adenocarcinoma in the cervical pap smear.  

    1. Describe the features of adenocarcinoma in situ and how it can be distinguished from some of its mimics
    2. Describe how to distinguish reactive endocervicals from adenocarcinoma
  12. Describe and identify the cytological features of endometrial and extrauterine adenocarcinomas in the pap smear.  

    1. Distinguishing features of endocervical and endometrial adenocarcinoma
    2. Distinguishing features of extrauterine adenocarcinoma
  13. Discuss the effectiveness of the cervical pap smear in diagnosis of malignant and premalignant lesions.  

    1. Significance of the atypical pap smear
    2. Interobserver reproducibility
    3. Screening accuracy
    4. Correlation with histopathology, and possible reasons for discrepancies
    5. Relative rates of cervical carcinoma in screened and unscreened populations
  14. Suggest appropriate clinical follow-up for abnormal pap smear findings

Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology

Goals: Learn to perform fine needle aspiration of palpable masses and to
diagnose the majority of commonly encountered lesions. Develop an appreciation
for the value and limitations of fine needle aspiration.

Objectives: Residents will be expected to study the following organ systems
and achieve the following objectives:

  1. Lymph nodes  

    1. Competently perform fine needle aspiration of palpable lymph nodes, appropriately triaging the specimens for ancillary studies.
    2. Diagnose  

      1. metastatic carcinoma
      2. metastatic melanoma
      3. lymphoma
      4. granulomatous inflammation
      5. acute suppurative lymphadenitis
      6. benign reactive changes
      7. Mycobacterial infection
      8. Branchial cleft cyst
    3. Recognize when a specimen should be judged non-diagnostic
    4. Suggest appropriate clinical follow-up for the above diagnoses
  2. Breast  

    1. Describe the sensitivity and specificity of diagnosing carcinoma by fine needle aspiration
    2. Be familiar with technique of performance of fine needle aspiration of the breast
    3. Know when a specimen is non-diagnostic
    4. Diagnose the following  

      1. carcinoma
      2. ductal atypia
      3. fibroadenoma
      4. benign ductal cells
      5. fat necrosis
      6. mastitis
    5. Suggest appropriate clinical follow-up for the above diagnoses
  3. Thyroid  

    1. Safely perform a fine needle aspiration of the thyroid
    2. Know what constitutes a diagnostic specimen
    3. Diagnose the following  

      1. anatoplastic carcinoma
      2. papillary carcinoma
      3. follicular neoplasm
      4. nodular goiter
      5. Hashimoto's thyroiditis
      6. Hurthle cell neoplasm
      7. normal thyroid tissue
    4. Suggest appropriate clinical follow-up for the above diagnoses
  4. Salivary gland  

    1. Perform a fine needle aspiration of salivary gland
    2. Know what constitutes an adequate specimen
    3. Diagnose the following  

      1. sialadenitis
      2. pleomorphic adenoma
      3. Warthin's tumor
      4. oncocytoma
      5. acinic cell carcinoma
      6. monomorphic adenoma
      7. muco-epidermoid carcinoma
      8. adenocarcinoma
  5. Lung  

    1. Assist in the performance of CT guided lung FNA  

      1. recognize a diagnostic specimen
      2. suggest appropriate ancillary studies
    2. Diagnose the following:  

      1. reactive lung and mesothelial cells
      2. granulomatous inflammation
      3. squamous cell carcinoma
      4. adenocarcinoma
      5. small cell carcinoma
      6. carcinoid
  6. Liver  

    1. Assist in CT guided liver aspiration
    2. Be familiar with findings in benign liver aspiration
    3. Diagnose the following:  

      1. granulomatous disease
      2. abscess
      3. hepatocellular carcinoma
      4. metastatic carcinoma  

        1. adenocarcinoma (including characteristics of colonic adenocarcinoma)
        2. squamous cell carcinoma
        3. small cell carcinoma
      5. carcinoid

Core Techniques and Methods Covered

  1. Accessioning, labeling, staining, and archiving of gynecologic cytology smears
  2. Preparation of routine Papanicolaou and Diff Quick stains
  3. Overview of hand cover slipping
  4. Familiarity with cover slipping machines
  5. Basic operating procedures and trouble shooting for Papanicolaou staining machine
  6. Preparation of thin prep slides from specimens submitted in liquid fixative
  7. Preparation of cytocentrifuge slides
  8. Preparation of direct smears
  9. Preparation of smears from material concentrated by centrifugation
  10. Preparation of paraffin embedded cell block samples
  11. Performance of rapid staining procedures on site in the radiology suite
  12. Triage of aspirated samples through various special studies depending on clinical diagnostic possibilities
  13. Discussing fine needle aspiration procedures with patients and physicians
  14. Competent performance of fine needle aspirations from a variety of body sites
  15. Preparation of aspirated material as smears, cell block sections, or samples for special studies

As noted previously, emphasis is placed on evaluating patients and forming
fine needle aspirations. This includes not only the actual puncture, but also
preparation of material, coordination of ancillary studies, and discussions
with the clinical residents and faculty.

#### Opportunities to Function as Consultant to Other Physicians

Patient problems are discussed with physicians in other departments either
before, at the time of, or after fine needle aspirations or after evaluation
at the microscope of other samples submitted directly to the laboratory. In
some cases these consultations are as simple as whether or not a particular
cytologic method has application to the clinical problem at hand. In other
instances, direct suggestions for patient care, further studies, or additional
samples that might be needed are the focus of the pathology resident's
consultation with physicians in other departments.

Directly related to patient care decision making, residents in pathology
function largely as consultants. Their most frequent role is interpretation of
cytologic findings in the light of other clinical circumstances. The primary
role in patient care decision making results largely from an advisory role
regarding the meaning of various cytologic findings and the need for any
additional testing.

Consultative interactions with physicians from other departments takes place
on an informal basis as groups of physicians come by the laboratory during
rounds or problem solving sessions. It is our philosophy that the resident in
pathology should be the first ones to interact with these teams. This allows
the resident to test his or her understanding of cytologic interpretations
currently being rendered in the laboratory. This also includes a role in
recommending additional testing or diagnostic limitations that may attend a
particular cytodiagnostic interpretation.

In cytopathology, we do not round with other departments. However, we
frequently host guests from other departments who are themselves making their
own working rounds. This usually involves review and discussion of current
cases. The clinical ramifications of the diagnosis being offered as well as
the need for any additional testing are often the focus of these discussions.

Correlating laboratory results with clinical findings happens frequently
during the clinical discussions just described. In cytopathology, a major
follow-up method is review of subsequently obtained or previously available
surgical samples in a surgical pathology laboratory. Special circumstances in
which other laboratory data or clinical findings may be important are also
discussed fully. For example, the possibility of aspiration pneumonia might be
the focus when a bronchoalveolar lavage specimen is submitted for oil Red O
staining. A frequent activity is review of pertinent radiographs including CT
scans. This often provides available supplementary information especially when
one considers the difficult diagnoses of malignancy.

Subsequently obtained histologic material is reviewed whenever possible. This
includes fine needle aspiration specimens, cervicovaginal smears, and non-
gynecologic preparations. Furthermore, cervical biopsies are signed out with a
record of all previous pap smears. Those that are abnormal and have led to the
cervical biopsy procedure are reviewed and a statement is rendered in the
report regarding the degree to which these do or do not correlate. At this
time, additional studies may be recommended.

#### On-Call Duties

The resident is expected to be available to laboratory personnel and our
clinical colleagues, either in person or by pager, throughout the working day.
The residents and fellows at Hennepin County Medical Center are provided with
a pager and are expected to be available for questions which arise on the
Cytology Service by a variety of clinical services. The cytopathology staff
person on-call is available at all times for review of questions and
recommendations for further action. During this rotation, the residents and
fellows will on average have one out of every seven days free of hospital
duties. Due to the at-home nature of call and the limited number of
emergencies, the call duties are generally constructed in the following
fashion. The on-call periods last from 7:00 a.m. on Monday morning through the
following weekend, ending at 7:00 a.m. on the subsequent Monday. While on-
call, residents and fellows are supervised by a teaching faculty member, who
is available at all times, either via their office phone, pager, or home
phone. The residents and fellows are expected to be available for weekend
procedures as they arise. Any interaction with the clinical services regarding
hematopathology issues is to be reviewed with the appropriate hematopathology
staff on-call, prior to interaction with the clinical services. The cytology
resident and fellow share on-call duties with the other anatomic pathology
services, including surgical, autopsy, and hematopathology on a rotating
basis. During the on-call period, the resident or fellow is responsible for
handling clinical requests that arise during off hours, emergent operating
room consultations, emergency off-hour autopsies with the approval of the on-
call staff pathologist, and autopsies which present before 12:00 noon on the
weekends.

#### Communication with On-Duty Faculty

Teaching faculty members on service are physically present during standard
operating hours (7:30 AM - 5:00PM); specific faculty members when not
physically present in the laboratory are available by phone or pager. No
diagnosis is communicated to clinicians before a faculty member has evaluated
the case.

#### Structured Education in Management of the Cytopathology Laboratory

Residents rotating in cytopathology are exposed to laboratory operations and
equipment, maintenance and operation, as previously described. During this
rotation, the residents will attend scheduled quality assurance, laboratory
safety, and other appropriate staff meetings as they relate to laboratory
management. As opportunity provides, residents will be allowed to participate
in CAP laboratory accreditation inspections of the laboratory, both self-
inspection and inspection of other laboratories.

#### Required Conference/Seminars

  * **Mondays** - ENT Conference, 7:30 - 8:30 am, monthly. Residents attend a clinicopathologic correlation working conference involving ENT, radiology, oncology, and pathology. This conference provides a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching. This clinical correlation conference provides trainees with the opportunity to present pathologic findings for correlation and discussion.
  * **Tuesdays** - Hennepin County Medical Center/Abbott Northwestern Hospital Unknown Conference, 7:30-8:30 a.m., weekly. This conference alternates hospital sites each week. Weekly challenge of 5 current (difficult or classic) cases from HCMC and 5 cases from Abbott-NW Hospital for review and diagnosis by the residents. This conference provides a weekly forum for trainee and faculty discussion of difficult and unusual cases. Each resident gives a diagnosis in round robin fashion with questioning and discussion by moderating faculty ( Brad Linzie MD and John Jones MD) from each institution.
  * **Wednesday** - University of Minnesota Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Grand Rounds, 8:00-9:00 a.m., weekly. Conference is held on the University of Minnesota Medical School Campus.
  * **Thursdays** - Tumor conference, 12:00 - 1:00 pm, weekly case based discussion presented by Faculty of Surgical Oncology, Radiology, Pathology, Radiation Oncology, Medical Oncology. This conference provides a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching. This clinical correlation conference provides trainees with the opportunity to present pathologic findings for correlation and discussion.
  * **Fridays** - Rosai/Sinard Conference, 7:15-8:00 a.m., weekly, residents present a variety of real cases on a theme related to a recent or up-coming the faculty Resident's Conference. Conference is held on the University of Minnesota Medical School Campus. This conference provides a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching with feedback given by the Chief Resident's Subcommittee.
  * **Fridays** - Resident's Conference, 8:00-9:00 a.m., weekly, residents attend conferences on a variety of scheduled pathology topics. Conference is held on the University of Minnesota Medical School Campus.
  * **Mondays** - Residents' Specialty Conference, 7:00 - 8:00 a.m., weekly; residents attend conferences put on by a staff pathologist, presenting cases from their specific specialty area.
  * **Wednesdays** - Residents' Unknown Conference, 7:00 - 8:00 a.m. (@3 weeks/month)
  * **Wednesdays** - Residents' Journal Club, 7:00 - 8:00 a.m. (1 week/month)

#### Interdepartmental Conferences

  1. Renal pathology conference, weekly interdisciplinary conference with pathology faculty and residents and nephrology faculty and residents. This conference provides a weekly forum for trainee and faculty discussion of difficult and unusual cases. This conference provides a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching. This clinical conference provides trainees with the opportunity to present pathologic findings for correlation and discussion.
  2. Neuromuscular conference, Wednesday, weekly presentation of cases by faculty neuromuscular pathologists to residents, technologists and other pathologists. This conference provides a weekly forum for trainee and faculty discussion of difficult and unusual cases. This clinical conference provides trainees with the opportunity to correlate and discuss pathologic findings.
  3. Urologic Pathology Conference, weekly. This conference provides a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching. This clinical conference provides trainees with the opportunity to present pathologic findings for correlation and discussion.
  4. Ob-Gyn Conference, monthly. This conference provides a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching. This clinical conference provides trainees with the opportunity to present pathologic findings for correlation and discussion.
  5. Dermatology Conference, weekly. This conference provides a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching. This clinical conference provides trainees with the opportunity to present pathologic findings for correlation and discussion.

#### Scholarly Activities and Research During Rotation

The current cytopathology literature is discussed in the light of diagnostic
problems that occur at the microscope. Pertinent literature is made available
to the resident and the findings are discussed. Particular emphasis is placed
on the areas of diagnostic limitation or difficulty. Residents are frequently
asked to do literature research into various problems that arise in the
laboratory. They are encouraged not only to use the library in a traditional
fashion, but also to use Internet-based resources as means of rapidly
surveying a large amount of literature and finding most precise possible
details relating to the specific problem at hand.

Residents are encouraged to look for similarities or contrasts between
different types of cases and to look for ways in which groups of cases might
be assembled into reports useful for clinical research projects. Residents on
this advanced rotation are required to complete a small written project during
the month. This may be a case report with review of the literature, small
series report, histochemical study or other. This project is to be developed
under the mentoring of Dr. Debol or any of the Anatomic Pathology staff if
they share a particular interest in a resident's or fellow's project.

#### Basis and Method of Resident Evaluation

Residents will be evaluated on performance of daily activities (described
previously), participation in required meetings and conferences, and
presentations to the staff on assigned cases. As an advanced rotation, the
resident is expected to perform at a level higher than that of a basic
cytology resident. The residents are provided with continuous feedback on
their performance during the rotation. In general, only deficiencies are noted
in writing. Residents are evaluated on their demonstrated ability to provide
informative consultation to the clinical service teams, their medical
knowledge, their application of this knowledge to efficient/quality patient
care, and their diagnostic, technical and observational skills. Residents are
also evaluated on their interpersonal skills, professional attitudes,
reliability, and ethics with members of the teaching faculty, peers,
laboratory staff, and clinicians. They are further evaluated on their
initiative in fostering quality patient care and use of the medical
literature, as it relates to their assigned cases. Their timely completion of
assigned interpretive reports is another component of the evaluation.
Residents on probation receive a written mid-rotation evaluation.

#### Educational Resources Available

Books

  1. DeMay RM: The Art and Science of Cytopathology, Exfoliative Cytology and Aspiration Cytology, Vol. I and II, ASCP 1996.
  2. DeMay R. Practical Principles of Cytopathology, ASCP Press, Chicago, 1999 (aka "Baby DeMay").
  3. Cibas ES, Ducatman BS, eds. Cytology: Diagnostic Principles and Clinical Correlates. Saunders (an imprint of Elsevier Limited), 2003.
  4. Bibbo M, ed. Comprehensive Cytopathology 2nd Edition. WB Saunders Company, Philadelphia, 1996.
  5. Silverberg SG, DeLellis RA and Frable WJ, eds. Principles and Practice of Surgical Pathology and Cytopathology, Churchill Livingstone, 3rd edition, New York, 1997.
  6. Kini SR. Thyroid Cytopathology, An Atlas and Text. Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2008.
  7. Geisinger KR, Stanley MW, Raab SS, Silverman JF, Abati A. Modern Cytopathology, 2004, Elsevier Science (USA), Churchill Livingstone.
  8. Koss LG. Koss' Diagnostic Cytology and Its Histopathologic Bases, Fifth Edition, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006.
  9. Bardales RH. Practical Urologic Cytopathology, Oxford Press, 2002.

Journals

  1. Acta Cytologica; All Volumes 6. Arch Pathol Lab Med; All Volumes
  2. Cancer Cytopathology; All Volumes 7. Cancer; All Volumes
  3. Am J Clin Pathol; All Volumes 8. Diag Cytopath; All Volumes
  4. Am J. Surg Pathol; All Volumes 9. Hum Pathol; All Volumes
  5. Anal Quat Cytol Histo; 1988 - current 10. Modern Pathology; All Volumes

Study Sets

_Exfoliative Cytology_

  * 448 cases of Female Genital Tract
  * 36 cases of Male Genital Tract
  * 76 cases of Urinary Tract
  * 201 cases of Respiratory Tract
  * 10 cases of Gastrointestinal Tract
  * 128 cases of Body Cavity Fluids
  * 73 cases of Cerebrospinal Fluid

_Fine Needle Aspirations_

  * 102 cases of Thyroid
  * 233 cases of Breast
  * 105 cases of Lymph Nodes
  * 70 cases of Liver
  * 47 cases of Kidney
  * 12 cases of Ovary
  * 106 cases of Lung
  * 10 cases of Malignant Melanoma
  * 45 cases of Salivary Gland

_Other Materials_

  * 1 Tutorials of Cytology
  * Long-Standing Subscriptions: Check Samples
  * Long-Standing Subscriptions: ASCP Teleconferences

#### Computer Information Systems for Resident Education and Service Duties

The integrated Cerner System for both Anatomic and Clinical Pathology provides
residents access to archival clinical and anatomic pathology data, quality
control results, and the status of pending cases and special studies.
Information on additional studies such as flow cytometry or cytogenetic
analyses are also available on these same terminals.

As noted previously, our residents are encouraged to take a hands-on approach
to the current cytopathology literature. Real time hands-on searching of
multiple medical literature data bases is available with desktop PCs using
institutional subscriptions managed by the Medical Center library personnel.

