---
title: Anatomic (Surgical and Autopsy) Pathology - Veterans' Affairs Medical Center, Minneapolis 
layout: default
categories:
- rotations
- ap
- required
---
#  Anatomic (Surgical and Autopsy) Pathology - Veterans' Affairs Medical
Center, Minneapolis

The Anatomic Pathology rotation at the VAMC is designed to provide the
residents with skills in the areas of tissue description, sectioning,
handling, and fixation. The rotation provides exposure to a wide variety of
cases to expand their microscopic diagnostic skills, with extra emphasis in
the areas of lung, urinary bladder, prostate, and skin pathology.

#### Institutional Site Director  

H. Evin Gulbahce, MD

#### Coordinating Teaching Faculty Members

* [Gloria Niehans, M.D.](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/niehans/)
(Surgical Pathology)

* [Robin Solomon, M.D.](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/solomon/)
(Autopsy Pathology)

#### Other Affiliated Teaching Faculty Members  

* [Deniz Aslan, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/aslan/)

* [Brian Berg, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/berg/)

* [Steven Ewing, M.D.](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/ewing/)

* [Carlos Iwamoto, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/iwamoto/)

* Lead Technical and Clerical Personnel  
Pathology Office: 612/725-2099

* Training Site:  
Laboratory Services, Veterans' Affairs Medical Center, Minneapolis

* Duration of Rotation:  
Three months (Surgical Pathology & Autopsy)

* Post Graduate Level of Residents Involved  
PGY 1-4

#### Core Competencies

These are essential to make residents into better individual physicians and
for improvement of general health care. The six competencies are:

  * **Patient care:** The residents should demonstrate satisfactory diagnostic competence and consultation. They should exhibit caring behavior toward patients, obtain essential information, utilize appropriate diagnostic tests, develop appropriate differential diagnosis, use information technology to support diagnosis, and should demonstrate competence in performance of invasive procedures.
  * **Medical knowledge:** The residents should demonstrate knowledge of established & evolving biomedical, clinical & cognate sciences, and should apply the investigative & analytic approach to problems in pathology.
  * **Practice-based learning & improvement:** The residents should demonstrate ability to investigate & evaluate diagnostic practices using scientific evidence. This involves analyzing practice with systematic methodology, assimilating evidence from scientific studies related to path problems, analyzing study designs & statistics of pathology problems, using information technology to manage information, and accessing on-line medical information, supporting education, and facilitating learning of students & health care professionals
  * **Interpersonal & communication skills:** The residents should demonstrate interpersonal & communication skills resulting in effective information exchange. They should also have effective listening skills. They should be able to exchange information with effective nonverbal, explanatory & writing skills, and work with others as a health care team.
  * **Professionalism:** The residents should demonstrate commitment to professional competence, honesty with patients & coworkers, patient confidentiality, improving quality of care, improving access to care, just distribution of finite resources, and advancing scientific knowledge.
  * **Systems-based practice:** The residents must demonstrate an awareness of the larger context and system of health care and have the ability to provide optimum pathology services within the system. They should understand how their practice affects the health care organization and other health care professionals. They should practice cost-effective health care. They should know how types of medical practices & delivery systems differ. They should be the advocates for quality patient care & assist patients with system complexities. They should partner with health care managers & health care providers to assess, coordinate, & improve health care and understand how these activities affect system performance. They should develop the ability to design cost-effective lab workup. They should obtain knowledge of sources of financing health care (Medicare, health plans), reimbursement plans, regulatory environment (JCAHO, CAP, CLIA, OSHA, FDA, CMS etc), and practice management (budgeting, records, personnel etc.).

#### Supervisory Guidelines for Patient Care and Specimen Handling

While both junior and senior residents perform similar tasks; senior residents
are allowed to work more independently. At all levels of training, the
resident's duties are always under the instruction and supervision of a
surgical pathology fellow, pathologist assistant, and/or staff pathologist. In
the gross room, the pathologist's assistant, the fellow, and/or the Pathology
Staff on the frozen section service supervise the residents. Staff
Pathologists sign out all Surgical Pathology and Autopsy reports.

#### Overview of Daily Duties and Responsibilities

Surgical pathology residents cover autopsy service two days a week and use
Fridays to follow-up on their autopsy cases. They also take weekend autopsy
calls.

Surgical Pathology Service

  * **Gross Room:** The residents are expected to participate in frozen sections arriving in the gross room. The residents are responsible, in conjunction with the surgical pathology fellow, for the initial gross inspection and dissection of the tissue submitted for intra-operative consultation. With the assistance of the technologists, they are responsible (along with the fellow) for preparing the frozen sections and reviewing them with the staff pathologist in a time-efficient fashion. The resident, along with the fellow, is responsible for calling/speaking with the attending physician in the operating room regarding the frozen section diagnosis. The resident subsequently becomes responsible for completing the dissection and dictation of the gross pathology report, including the frozen section diagnosis. On assigned gross room days, the residents are responsible for the gross description and dissection of all specimens accessioned in a reasonable time frame. With technical support, the residents are required to ensure that the specimen is properly sectioned and fixed prior to histological processing. The residents are responsible for reviewing all large complex cases with the assigned staff pathologist prior to dissection. The residents are ultimately responsible for the proper fixation, description, and sampling of the surgical and biopsy specimens under the supervision of the pathologist assistant and staff pathologists.
  * **Microscopic Sign-Out:** On day two, the residents have the responsibility of reviewing all of their cases from the previous grossing day. Residents are expected to review their cases and prepare a differential diagnosis. They are also responsible for preparing provisional coding of their cases based upon their preliminary diagnosis. For cases in which clinical or diagnostic concerns arise, the resident should contact and work with the surgical pathology fellow and staff pathologist to meet the clinicians' needs. In general, cases are usually signed out in the afternoon with a staff pathologist and the report finalized. Residents dictate the original draft of the surgical pathology reports with coding information during sign outs.
  * In general, the residents are involved in daily duties separate from the surgical pathology fellows, who are available as consultants for questions; While the fellows and residents may work together on a case, the fellows do not decrease the number of cases seen by the residents.

Autopsy Service

  1. The residents work under the direct supervision of a pathologist assistant and/or staff pathologist.
  2. Residents are expected to be fully involved in all aspects of the post-mortem examination, including but not limited to, review of the medical record, summation of the circumstances of death, external examination of the body, evisceration, dissection of the organs, preparation of the written autopsy report, preparation of the preliminary anatomic diagnosis, review of microscopic findings, review of all ancillary testing, and determination of the cause and manner of death. The above level of involvement is expected for both individual and shared autopsies.
  3. In order to consider an autopsy educationally effective, it needs to be completed within 30 days of the patient's death. Therefore, trainees can only count those autopsies that are completed within this time frame toward their graduation requirement.
  4. After receiving a valid permit for an autopsy, the resident completes a review of the pre-mortem clinical condition, including:  

    1. Review the medical record,
    2. Discuss the case with the attending physician and house staff, and
    3. Discuss the case with the staff pathologist / pathologist assistant.
  5. A thorough external examination of the body is then performed with all findings described and documented. Pertinent findings should also be photographed.
  6. The resident will then undertake a systematic approach to the postmortem examination, including organ dissection and evaluation of the macroscopic pathology. The dissection will be performed using universal blood and body fluid precautions.
  7. The resident will sample any gross abnormalities for conventional histology and possible histochemistry, immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy.
  8. The resident and staff pathologist will review the microscopic findings.
  9. The resident and staff pathologist then discuss the clinical data, macroscopic and microscopic findings, and write the final autopsy report that includes a brief clinical-pathologic correlation section.
  10. The resident, pathologist assistant and staff pathologist review the pathologic findings with the treating clinical team. The resident should invite the house staff members associated with the patient's care to come to the autopsy or review the gross organs afterwards.
  11. The residents will participate in brain cutting and neuropathology microscopic sign-out with consultant neuropathologists and/or staff pathologists.
  12. The resident on the autopsy service is responsible for presenting the Monday morning gross conference. During this conference, the resident will present the autopsies from the previous week, including a brief clinical summary and pertinent macroscopic and microscopic findings. In addition, the resident will be an active participant in the cardiovascular and neuropathology conferences associated with their autopsies.

#### Goals and Objectives

Surgical Pathology

  1. Basic understanding of the approach to surgical and biopsy specimens, including dissection, photographic illustration, sampling, and fixation.
  2. Basic understanding of gross pathology and lesion descriptions that include prognostic information.
  3. Basic understanding of the appropriate methods for submitting tissue for histologic evaluation, including the safe use of different fixatives.
  4. Learn sampling and fixation of specimens for electron microscopy. Develop a basic understanding for the interpretation of electron microscopy on surgical pathology specimens.
  5. Participation in operating room consultations (frozen sections), including appropriate sampling, processing, and interpretation, as well as interactions with clinicians. Develop a basic understanding of the common indications and contraindications for frozen section evaluation of tissue.
  6. Understanding the use of intraoperative consultation for clinical decision-making.
  7. Demonstrate the ability to work calmly under pressure.
  8. Have a basic understanding of the microscopic approach to histologic sections.
  9. Become familiar with the elements of the surgical pathology report and have the ability to generate high-quality microscopic descriptions.
  10. Have a basic understanding of special stains, as they apply to histologic interpretation.
  11. Learn how and when to utilize immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy in the development of a final surgical pathology diagnosis.
  12. Demonstrate sufficient knowledge and scholarly insight to adequately describe and interpret unusual cases.
  13. Be proficient in the performance of literature searches.
  14. Gain familiarity of one's ability and limitations and know when and how to consult with surgical pathology colleagues.

Autopsy Pathology

  1. Ability to efficiently collect clinical information from the patient's chart and correlate the clinical data with gross and microscopic pathologic findings.
  2. Proficiency in the techniques of post-mortem examination.
  3. Learn to observe, describe and sample gross pathologic abnormalities.
  4. Learn the histologic manifestations of the major types of diseases.
  5. Learn to translate all findings into an autopsy report: clinical, macroscopic and microscopic.
  6. Be familiar with infection control policies and procedures.

#### Resident Opportunities to Function as Consultant to Other Physicians

Residents generate a number of consultative reports, including the
surgical/autopsy pathology reports, the intraoperative consultation reports,
and special studies reports. The residents participate in direct patient care
by communicating surgical pathology diagnoses and their implications to the
clinical residents and staff on the wards. Residents interact with other
training programs on a peer basis, including internal medicine, radiology, and
otolaryngology. Frequently, the residents are requested to present their
surgical/autopsy cases at the clinical service rounds of other departments.
During the rotation, residents are expected to participate in the correlation
studies between biopsies, pap smears, and fine needle aspirations.

#### On Call Duties

During this rotation the residents will on average have one out of every seven
days free of hospital duties. The residents have no surgical pathology on-call
duties during this rotation.

While on the surgical and autopsy services, the residents are expected to
participate in weekend call for the performance of autopsies. The rotation
director assigns autopsy duties approximately every other weekend. When on
call, the resident is responsible for calling hospital to see if any autopsies
arrive before 2:00 p.m. each day. Prior to the initiation of an autopsy, the
resident is expected to call and discuss the case with the staff pathologist.
Autopsies will not be started after 2:00 p.m. except under unusual
circumstances. If a resident on the autopsy service is called on both weekend
days, an in-lieu day may be awarded after consultation with the rotation
director.

#### Prompt and Reliable Communication with On-duty Faculty

During general working hours, the on service supervising teaching faculty is
available in person with other faculty members available by scheduled
appointment, by phone, and by pager. During the on-call hours, the teaching
faculty is continuously available either at home by phone or by pager.

#### Structured Education and Management of the Surgical Pathology Laboratory

During this rotation, the residents will attend scheduled quality assurance,
laboratory safety, and other appropriate meetings as they relate to laboratory
management. As opportunity provides, residents will be allowed to participate
in CAP laboratory accreditation, including self-inspections and inspection of
other institutions.

#### Required Conference/Seminars

  * **Mondays:**  
8:30 a.m. - Gross pathology/autopsy conference, weekly, residents present
their autopsy and interesting surgical pathology gross specimens. This
conference provides a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching. This
correlation conference provides trainees with the opportunity to present
pathologic findings for correlation and discussion.

9:30 a.m. - Unknown surgical pathology conference, weekly, residents present
their interpretation of unknown cases. This conference provides a weekly forum
for trainee and faculty discussion of difficult and unusual cases.


  * **Tuesdays:**  
9:00 a.m. - Dermatopathology conference with dermatopathologist in
dermatology. Residents present their interesting skin cases from the prior
week. This conference provides a weekly forum for trainee and faculty
discussion of difficult and unusual cases. This clinical correlation
conference provides trainees with the opportunity to present pathologic
findings for correlation and discussion.


  * **Wednesdays:**  
7:00-8:00 a.m. - Surgical Pathology Unknown Conference, weekly, residents
present their interpretation of unknown cases. Conference is held in the
Division of Surgical Pathology at Fairview-University Medical Center. This
conference provides a weekly forum for trainee and faculty discussion of
difficult and unusual cases. Residents are responsible for reviewing the cases
prior to the conference. Slides are put out for review one week in advance.

8:00-9:00 a.m. - Laboratory Medicine Grand Rounds, weekly, residents attend
conferences on a variety of basic science and clinical topics. Conference is
held on the University of Minnesota Medical School Campus.

Noon - Morbidity and mortality conference, weekly. Residents attend this
conference and present relevant surgical and autopsy case findings. This
conference provides a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching. This clinical
correlation conference provides trainees with the opportunity to present
pathologic findings for correlation and discussion.


  * **Thursdays:**  
Afternoons - Neuropathology conference, brain cutting and histology review,
weekly. Residents attend and dissect the brains from their autopsy cases. The
histology from the prior weeks cases is also reviewed. This conference
provides a weekly forum for trainee and faculty discussion of difficult and
unusual cases.


  * **Fridays:**  
8:00-9:00 a.m. - Resident's Conference, weekly, residents attend conferences
on a variety of scheduled pathology topics. Conference is held on the
University of Minnesota Medical School Campus.

Noon - Journal Club, weekly, residents attend and are required to present one
of these conferences during their rotation. This conference provides a regular
avenue for trainee peer teaching.

#### Optional Conferences

  * **Thursdays:**  
City Wide Surgical Pathology Conference, 8:00-9:00 a.m., weekly, pathologists
from the city bring interesting cases to share and discuss. Conference is held
on the University of Minnesota Medical School Campus. This conference provides
a weekly forum for trainee and faculty discussion of difficult and unusual
cases.

#### Scholarly Activities and Research During Rotation

Residents are provided with continuous access to literature searching
programs. The expectation is that residents will utilize the medical
literature to find up-to-date information on their cases. It is further
expected that residents will utilize the medical literature to help provide
our colleagues with up-to-date knowledge related to the cases they complete.
During sign-out of cases, the residents and teaching faculty discuss each
case, both from a histologic and scholarly perspective. In discussing the
latter, the resident and faculty discuss both normal and abnormal physiology
and the mechanisms potentially responsible for creating the morphologic
findings observed. It is hoped that these discussions will foster an interest
in research and the development of new knowledge.

#### Basis and Method of Resident Evaluation

The residents are provided with continuous feedback on their performance
during their rotation. In general, only deficiencies are noted in writing
during the rotation. Residents are evaluated on their demonstrated ability to
provide informative consultation to the clinical service teams, their medical
knowledge, their application of this knowledge to efficient/quality patient
care, their diagnostic, technical and observational skills both in the gross
room and at the microscope, and their interpersonal skills, professional
attitudes, reliability, and ethics with members of the teaching faculty,
peers, laboratory staff, and clinicians. They are also evaluated on their
initiative in completing and fostering quality patient care, their use of the
medical literature and other resources, as it relates to their assigned cases.
Their timely completion of assigned interpretive reports is another component
of the evaluation. Residents on probation receive a written mid-rotation
evaluation. On-line evaluations are completed using e-value system, for all
rotating residents and fellows at the completion of their rotations.

#### Educational Resources Available

Residents are provided with access to multiple general and specialty surgical
pathology textbooks including:

  * Sternberg, et al. Diagnostic Surgical Pathology
  * Silverberg, et al. Principles and Practice of Surgical Pathology & Cytopathology
  * Rosai, Ackerman's Surgical Pathology
  * Kurman, Blaustein's Pathology of the Female Genital Tract
  * AFIP Tumor Fascicles
  * Enzinger, Soft Tissue Tumors
  * Tavassoli, Pathology of the Breast
  * Lever's Pathology of Skin

In addition, the Veterans' Hospital has an on-site full service medical
library with multiple pathology textbooks and journals. Residents have 24-hour
access to this library via the Admission's Desk at night. Further, residents
have access to the University of Minnesota Medical School Library (Diehl
Hall), which is one the University of Minnesota Campus.

#### Computer Information Systems for Resident Education and Service Duties

Residents have continuous access to the laboratory information systems, which
relate to patient care on the Veterans Affairs Medical Center Campus. The
residents also have access to on-line literature searching in the residents'
room.

