---
title: Anatomic (Surgical and Autopsy) Pathology at University of Minnesota Medical Center, Fairview, University Campus 
layout: default
---
#  Anatomic (Surgical and Autopsy) Pathology at University of Minnesota
Medical Center, Fairview, University Campus

![](http://residency.pathology.umn.edu/sites/default/files/styles/medium/publi
c/ummcf.jpg?itok=R5X1E9TE)The anatomic pathology rotation at University of
Minnesota Medical Center, Fairview, University Campus, is designed to instruct
trainees in anatomic pathology in a tertiary care, academic setting. The
rotation encompasses both surgical and autopsy pathology. As they evaluate
patient specimens, physicians in training are instructed in gross evaluation,
microscopic evaluation, and ancillary studies. By providing residents with
increasing responsibilities and duties, as their level of training progresses,
the teaching faculty hope to instill in the resident the skills and tools
necessary to develop a life-long course of continued professional development.

#### Institutional Site Director

[Jon Ritter, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/ritter/)

#### Coordinating Teaching Faculty Member

[Hannah Krigman, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/krigman/)

#### Teaching Faculty Members

[Khalid Amin, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/khalidamin/)

[H. Brent Clark MD, PhD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/clark/)
(Neuropathology)

[Yusheng Han, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/yushenghan/)

[Hannah Krigman, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/krigman/)
(Surgical Pathology, Cytopathology)

[Carlos Manivel, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/manivel/)
(Surgical, Bone, Soft tissue, and Pediatric Pathology)

[Ralph Powell, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/powell/) (Autopsy
Pathology)

[Robyn Reed, MD, PhD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/reed/) (Pediatric
Pathology)

[Jon Ritter, MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/ritter/) (Surgical
Pathology)

[Alexander Truskinovsky,
MD](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/truskinovsky/) (Surgical Pathology,
Gyn, GU Pathology)

#### Pathologist Assistants

Rob Heineman

Xingchu Shen

Matthew Lurken

#### Lead Technical and Clerical Personnel

Sally McCasland, Lead Histotech

Pam Horge, HT, Histology Supervisor

Susie Clark, Supervisor, Anatomic Pathology Office

Brian Dunnette, Digital Imaging Information Systems

#### Training Site

University of Minnesota Medical Center, Fairview, University Campus

#### Duration of Rotation

3 months - 2 months surgical and 1 month autopsy pathology

#### Post Graduate Level of Residents Involved

PGY levels 1-4

The Basic learning objectives and programmatic expectations are outlined
below. This is followed by an introduction to resident activities in Surgical
Pathology, the role of surgical pathology fellows, daily duties and
responsibilities in surgical pathology and by the Goals and Objectives. The
latter are the specific skills that you must acquire during your training. The
following section highlights the basic schedule of rotations in Anatomic
Pathology, the learning objectives for Anatomic Pathology and for Surgical
Pathology (skill levels I and II for each). The next section highlights the
opportunities for residents to function as consultants and to correlate
morphology with ancillary studies. Subsequent sections address on-call duties,
communication with faculty, and structured education and management of the
surgical pathology laboratory. The important appendices summarize the
conferences schedule, special histochemical stains and immunohistochemical
stains available in our diagnostic armamentarium.

### Surgical Pathology Rotation Outline

#### Daily Duties and Responsibilities - Surgical Pathology

Daily activities start with conferences during which, "protected" time is
afforded to residents. These are intradepartmental conferences (See appendix)
and all AP residents in this rotation are expected to attend. Following the
conferences, residents are assigned to either gross-room activities (day 1 of
cycle) or to previewing and signing biopsies and large specimens (days 2 and 3
of cycle). It is responsibility if the resident to proof-read dictations on
cases to be signed out on days 2 and 3 and to obtain additional information
from the electronic medical records, as necessary.

#### Basic Learning Objectives

The basic learning objectives and basic programmatic expectations of residents
follow guidelines recommended by ADASP (Curriculum content and evaluation of
resident competency in Anatomic Pathology. Am J Clin Pathol 2003:120:652-660).

  1. Gain knowledge and technical skills to recognize, interpret, and explain pathologic processes in the clinical practice of anatomic pathology.
  2. Effectively communicate pathologic findings to colleagues and provide consultative information regarding patient management.
  3. Effectively direct and manage the pathology laboratory in all regards.

#### Basic Programmatic Expectations Of Residents

  1. Develop an understanding of basic pathologic processes.
  2. Acquire skills needed to interpret laboratory data and make clinicopathologic correlations.
  3. Communicate effectively and share expertise with peers and colleagues.
  4. Develop investigative skills to better understand pathologic processes as they apply to both individual patients and the general patient population.
  5. Acquire knowledge and experience in laboratory direction and management.
  6. Assume leadership roles in education of other physicians and allied health professionals.

#### Competencies In Pathology

The ACGME currently requires that training programs in pathology enable
residents to develop competencies in the broad areas described here.

##### General Comments On Competencies

Residents must develop competencies in the 6 areas listed here to the level
expected of a new practitioner. Toward this end, each program must define the
specific knowledge, skills, and attitudes that are required and provide
educational experiences as needed for their residents to develop the desired
competencies. The program must create and reinforce the concept of life-long
learning.

  1. Patient Care. Residents must demonstrate a satisfactory level of diagnostic competence and the ability to provide appropriate and effective consultation in the context of pathology services.
  2. Medical Knowledge. Residents must demonstrate knowledge about established and evolving biomedical, clinical, and cognitive (eg, epidemiological and social-behavioral) sciences and the application of this knowledge to pathology.
  3. Practice-Based Learning and Improvement. Residents must be able to demonstrate the ability to investigate and evaluate their diagnostic and consultative practices, appraise and assimilate scientific evidence, and improve their patient care practices.
  4. Interpersonal and Communication Skills. Residents must be able to demonstrate interpersonal and communication skills that result in effective information exchange and teaming with other health care providers, patients, and patients' families.
  5. Professionalism. Residents must demonstrate a commitment to carrying out professional responsibilities, adherence to ethical principles, and sensitivity to a diverse patient population.
  6. Systems-Based Practice. Residents must demonstrate an awareness and responsiveness to the larger context and system of health care and the ability to call on system resources to provide pathology services that are of optimal value.

##### Observations On Competencies In Pathology

The curriculum and associated competencies delineated here relate to "core"
(ie, non-elective) training in anatomic pathology. Competencies for advanced
training in specific subspecialty areas with dedicated fellowships and board
examinations (eg, hematopathology, dermatopathology) are highlighted
elsewhere, in the description of fellowships.

Because of multiple individual variables, it is not practical to define
competencies that are specific for year 1 or year 2 of training. Instead,
competency assessment should be evaluated on an ongoing basis using as
descriptors 1- "beginner (novice)", 2- "profluent (flowing smoothly") and 3-
"Proficient". It is neither realistic nor desirable to specify certain
diagnoses or defined numbers of cases of a given type as elements of
competency. This program fulfills ACGME requirements to provide a caseload
that is both high enough and varied enough to ensure broad training.

In defining competencies in anatomic pathology, specific and critical areas in
the training process are delineated, without attempting to provide excessive
detail or complexity. Specific skills that must be mastered to accomplish
these competencies are highlighted below as "**Goals and Objectives**".

  1. Basic Principles 
    * Knowledge of JACHO/CAP standards/requirements for specimen submission
    * Knowledge of JCAHO/CAP standards regarding occupational hazards/infection control
    * Tissue fixation (including commonly used special fixatives)
    * Tissue processing
    * Embedding, orientation
    * Section preparation, levels, etc.
    * Use of special stains, immunohistology, electron microscopy, cytogenetics, etc.
    * Storage/disposal of specimens and hazardous chemicals
    * Basic computer skills in anatomic pathology
  2. Gross Examination 
    * Specimen identification
    * Anatomically correct dissection
    * Accurate dictated description
    * Specimen photography (where appropriate)
    * Appropriate blocks for microscopic examination
    * Proper examination of margins (where appropriate)
    * Special handling of common specimens (eg, culture, electron microscopy, cytogenetics, bone marrow)
  3. Microscopic Examination Basic 
    * Accurate morphological description
    * Reasonable diagnosis/differential diagnosis
    * Basic elements of information required in all reports
    * Preparation of written report
    * Preparation/organization or sign out with senior
    * Correlation with frozen section findings More advanced
    * Accurate diagnosis or need for consultation
    * Special stains/immunoperoxidase (where appropriate)
    * Interpretation of immunostains (and associated artifacts)
    * Knowledge/use of grading systems
    * Synoptic reports (as appropriate)
    * Amended/addendum reports
    * Proper handling of consultation cases
    * Photomicroscopy
  4. Intraoperative Frozen Sections/Smears Basic 
    * Role of intraoperative diagnosis; appropriate indications
    * Tissue sampling for intraoperative diagnosis
    * Cutting/staining of frozen section (within 10 minutes)
    * Precautions for handling fresh tissue or other specimens for intraoperative diagnosis More advanced
    * Preparation/staining of smears
    * Interpretation of frozen sections/smears
    * Limitations of intraoperative diagnosis
    * Communication/dialogue with treating physician
  5. Autopsy 
    * Role of autopsy/indications for autopsy
    * Autopsy permission and assignment of medicolegal status
    * Performance of autopsy (within 4 hours)
    * Differentiation of natural and unnatural death
  6. Cytopathology (Note: Competency objectives modified with permission from the American Society of Cytopathology Taskforce on Residency Training in Cytopathology.) 
    * Interpretation of cytopathology specimens from the various commonly sampled body sites by examining cases before sign out and appropriately communicating diagnostic opinions, differential diagnoses, and/or follow-up recommendations
    * Performance of superficial fine-needle aspiration biopsies in a clinical setting, with appropriate patient care and diagnostic outcomes
    * Assistance with deep fine-needle aspiration biopsies in such settings as radiology and endoscopy, with appropriate determination of specimen adequacy and the need for ancillary techniques, and collection of supplementary diagnostic materials for such techniques
    * Continuous quality assurance and regulatory compliance methodologies as they apply to the cytopathology laboratory (eg, the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988)
  7. Molecular Diagnostics/Cytogenetics 
    * Role of these techniques in the diagnosis of neoplastic disease, particularly hematolymphoid disorders
    * Role of these techniques in the diagnosis of infectious disease
    * Role of these techniques in the diagnosis of common heritable disorders
    * Principles and limitations of polymerase chain reaction, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, fluorescence in situ hybridization, Southern blot analysis, and karytotyping
    * Critical issues of quality control in using these techniques
  8. Laboratory Management 
    * Diagnostic coding/billing procedures
    * Basic federal law (including compliance) applicable to pathology
    * JCAHO/CAP standards for laboratory certification
    * Cost-effective practice of pathology
    * Principles of quality assurance/improvement
    * Basic risk management issues
  9. General Skills 
    * Use of appropriate phraseology in reports
    * Appropriate communication with clinician (or patient/family as appropriate)
    * Timeliness/turnaround time/indications to rush cases
    * Resolution of diagnostic disagreement
    * Internal/external consultation
    * Training of more junior residents
    * Ability to make an independent case presentation

#### Introduction to Resident Activities in Surgical Pathology

##### Three-day cycle:

Residents follow a three-day cycle in this rotation. The first day they are
assigned to the Gross room; the second day they sign-out biopsies and the
third day, they sign out large specimens, as further explained below.

See autopsy description below for details related to the autopsy service.

Teaching faculty members are physically present during standard operating
hours; faculty members not physically present are rapidly available by phone
or pager. At all times, a supervising faculty member is on-call at night,
during week-ends and holidays (See on call duties, below). No diagnosis is
communicated to the clinicians before a faculty member has evaluated the case.

##### Role of Surgical Pathology Fellows:

Surgical pathology fellows do not compete with residents for cases; all cases
are handled by the resident. Surgical pathology fellows assist in the
supervision and teaching of residents under close faculty supervision. Under
staff guidance, the fellows supervise the residents in the gross room. In
order to ensure a proper educational environment, review of cases with the
residents is divided between one fellow and staff pathologists. Slides from
all accessioned cases are reviewed by the resident, who may be assisted by a
fellow. Further, any case reviewed with a fellow can also be shown to a
faculty member by the resident. The teaching faculty reviews all cases before
a final diagnosis is established. Resident feedback from the teaching faculty
is provided directly in the gross room, during sign-out sessions and for those
cases reviewed with the fellow on an ad-hoc basis, when requested by the
resident, or when a faculty member considers it appropriate. If no fellows are
available, all cases are reviewed directly with the staff pathologist.

#### Description of Daily Duties and Responsibilities - Surgical Pathology

**Day 1:** Gross Room- Based on their level of training residents are provided increasing autonomy with close faculty supervision. In the gross room, residents discuss each specimen as needed with the supervising faculty member prior to its dissection. This includes documentation of relevant prognostic information, the approach to the specimen, and procurement of tissues in special fixatives or frozen, if necessary. Gross room operation is supervised by the faculty members, pathologist assistants and surgical pathology fellows. The residents have the responsibility of grossing specimens received in the laboratory on their designated days. In general, residents gross in cases that require dissection; by their nature, these are more complex and have greater teaching value. Pathologist assistants in general gross in small biopsies. Gross room responsibilities include the dictation of the clinical history, gross features of the specimen, and the appropriate sampling of any lesions or surgical margins. The residents also participate in any special procedures performed at this time, such as gross photography, sampling of tissue for electron microscopy, flow cytometry, cytogenetics, and tissue banking.

**Day 2:** Biopsy sign-out session- On the following day, the residents are required to review the microscopic findings from all cases that they grossed in and all cases grossed in by the pathologist assistants the previous day. With faculty guidance, residents are responsible for deciding what additional ancillary studies such as immunohistochemistry or special stains may be necessary in order to properly evaluate each case. In order to address patient care needs, clinician expectations and standards of the community, biopsies are signed-out the day after the specimen is received (24 hours turn-around time). Residents are expected to pre-view as many cases as possible before sign-out; however, all slides from all biopsies are reviewed with the resident.

**Day 3:** Large specimen sign-out session- In order to provide the resident an extra day to review the slides, large specimens are signed-out the following day (48 hours turn-around time). Residents are expected to preview all slides on large specimens, reach a differential diagnosis and to evaluate the need for additional ancillary studies that may be necessary in order to properly evaluate each case, before reviewing them with a fellow or faculty member. Residents are expected to preview all slides on all large cases accessioned on day 1. Advanced residents are responsible for preparing the original draft of the interpretive surgical pathology reports. During the rotation, the resident is responsible for presenting a didactic lecture on a surgical pathology topic to faculty members, technologists, or related health-care professionals.

#### Goals And Objectives: Specific Skills That Apply To All Areas Of Anatomic
Pathology

_Modified from ADASP: Curriculum Content And Evaluation Of Resident Competency
In Anatomic Pathology. Am J Clin Pathol 2003:120:652-660._

INTRODUCTION: This should be regarded as a "live document"; it is a "Captain's
log-book" through which you must continually and regularly evaluate your
accomplishments. This analysis is critical in order for you to become what
every surgical pathologist should be, a qualified and expert member of the
clinical team. Ignoring this list of skills or considering them a simple
formality will leave your training rudderless, at the mercy of chance alone.
You should always keep these items in mind, and review this list at the
beginning, halfway point, and at the end of each of your rotations in Anatomic
Pathology at the University and at each affiliated institution. Problems in
accomplishing any specific objective should be discussed with the coordinator
of each rotation, the coordinator of Anatomic Pathology or with the residency
director.

As you analyze these skills and objectives, you will realize that they
encompass many different types of knowledge, depths of knowledge and
complexity. Many of them you will acquire by reading; others by looking at
cases (as many as you can) and by actually, handling the cases yourself. Some
of them can be regarded as "essential" or "elementary" building blocks that
you will need to master in order to accomplish the more complex goals. Some of
them refer to simple knowledge; others are more complex and require a
combination of knowledge, common sense, attitudes and values. It is important
to always remember that in surgical pathology, the patient is ahead of
everything and everybody, including yourself. It is only when you understand
the overriding value of "patients come first" that you will be worthy of being
a member of the clinical team.

When you consider that you have achieved a specific objective, mark it on the
left space. This is an "honors" type of evaluation; nobody will test you
(don't worry! However, it will guarantee that you will pass your boards!).
More importantly, your clinical colleagues and your patients will validate
your achievement of these skills and objectives.

  * ____ Be able to obtain pertinent information from the patient's clinical record; requires familiarity with electronic medical record (EMR).
  * ____ Demonstrate knowledge of information that is necessary to provide adequate clinical history on submission forms for anatomic pathology specimens.
  * ____ Demonstrate knowledge of the general principles and terminology for processing anatomic pathology specimens, including patient identification, gross examination, and dissection.
  * ____ Demonstrate familiarity with the detailed organization, equipment, and techniques of the histology laboratory, including tissue processing, tissue embedding, preparation and staining of glass slides (information that histotechnologists must have to properly process tissue), and orientation of specimens.
  * ____ Be able to dissect tissues in such a way as to preserve important pathologic findings and fix them so they may be used for clinicopathologic correlation as well as teaching.
  * ____ Recognize normal gross anatomical landmarks.
  * ____ Recognize normal histological structures.
  * ____ Know when to obtain photograph from gross specimens and demonstrate the ability to take adequate gross and microscopic photographs using both film-based and digital cameras.
  * ____ Demonstrate the ability to select correct pieces of tissue for sectioning and preservation, and maintenance and identification of tissue orientation during processing.
  * ____ Provide adequate morphologic description of histologic slides.
  * ____ Be familiar with the procedures for handling infectious specimens including HIV, hepatitis, tuberculosis, and others.
  * ____ Describe the common pathogens that can be transmitted to laboratory personnel in pathology, as well as basic safety precautions to be taken in the anatomic pathology laboratory, including universal precautions for infectious agents and the role of the pathologist in institutional infection control.
  * ____ Be able to recognize the limits of your abilities and know when to consult for help.
  * ____ Demonstrate knowledge of the general principles and terminology for processing anatomic pathology specimens, including patient identification, gross examination, and dissection.
  * ____ Be thoroughly familiar with the sampling of lesions and surgical margins in the gross room; including inking/labeling and adequacy of sampling.
  * ____ Be able to handle in a routine fashion biopsy and resection specimens of low and moderate complexity, with a degree of difficulty equal to or comparable to resections of the breast, colon, urinary bladder, prostate, larynx, lung, heart, and kidney.
  * ____ Be able to handle in a routine fashion biopsy and resection specimens of high complexity, with a degree of difficulty equal to or comparable to Whipple procedure, pelvic exenteration, eye enucleation, amputation or composite resection for tumor.
  * ____ Provide accurate and complete gross descriptions of specimens.
  * ____ Provide an adequate differential diagnosis from the gross examination of a specimen.
  * ____ Be familiar with photographic techniques for gross room specimens.
  * ____ Be familiar with different fixatives, their use, and indications: Formalin, alcohol, AZF, Glutaraldehyde, and Bouin's.
  * ____ Understand the indications for performance of frozen sections
  * ____ Be able to analyze a patient's charts in a reasonable time during frozen sections: abstract relevant information.
  * ____ Be able to select an appropriate piece of tissue for frozen section consultation, freeze it, cut it, stain it with hematoxylin and eosin and Diff-Quick ® and coverslip representative sections.
  * ____ Describe precautions to be taken against infectious and radioactive hazards in the handling of fresh tissue and during intraoperative consultations.
  * ____ Exhibit proficiency in performing special hematological studies, including touch preparations, cytospins, and blood smears.
  * ____ Exhibit proficiency in initiating routine microbiological studies, including appropriate cultures, smears, and stains, and knowledge of methods of collection and preservation, if needed.
  * ____ Interpret the majority of frozen sections in which the answer is either positive or negative, such as surgical margins (including orientation of specimen, inking of margins and ink fixation), presence of tumor, presence of metastases, or presence of ganglion cells. Be able to provide an extended differential diagnosis when appropriate.
  * ____ Be able to communicate effectively with the surgeon to obtain and transmit pertinent information during frozen sections.
  * ____ Communicate adequately with laboratory personnel to request specific studies on any given case.
  * ____ Describe the appropriate storage and disposal of tissues and fixatives, and the proper "banking" of human tissues.
  * ____ Provide a precise diagnosis for most common cases.
  * ____ Be thoroughly familiar with special histochemical stains, their indications, and interpretation, including stains for collagen fibers, elastic fibers, reticulin fibers, amyloid (congo red, crystal violet), myelin, axons, copper binding protein, PAS, mucicarmine, acid mucopolysaccharides, melanin, Jones' methenamine silver; Be familiar with the use of digestive enzymes, such as hyaluronidase, diastase. (See appendix for Histopathology Special Stain Request Form).
  * ____ Determine the general nature of a pathologic process as neoplastic or non-neoplastic.
  * ____ For the most common neoplastic lesions, using microscopic criteria, determine the benign versus malignant nature of a tumor.
  * ____ For neoplastic lesions, determine the general category of a tumors origin (e.g. epithelial, mesenchymal, lymphoid, etc.).
  * ____ Provide a reasonable differential diagnosis for neoplastic lesions and enumerate resources available to establish a specific diagnosis.
  * ____ Be thoroughly familiar with pathological classifications of tumors (e.g., WHO, AFIP, etc.)
  * ____ Be thoroughly familiar with staging parameters (AJCC) and histologic grading of tumors.
  * ____ Be thoroughly familiar with all elements required in the diagnosis of neoplastic and non-neoplastic diseases, including information on staging, grading, prognostic and therapeutic guidance parameters. These are include as "templates" in CoPath ® and are adapted from ADASP, CAP, ASCP, and specialty societies and modified with clinician input.
  * ____ Determine general nature of non-neoplastic lesions; such as degenerative, metabolic, infectious, developmental, or inflammatory
  * ____ Know when a case can be signed out with the material available and when additional work-up will be necessary; including additional sampling, deeper levels, electron microscopy, histochemical stains, flow cytometry, immunofluorescence, molecular diagnostics, radiologic, clinical, or laboratory correlation.
  * ____ Demonstrate knowledge of the specimens that commonly require special handling in the gross room (e.g., flow cytometry, microbiological cultures, recovery of crystals, electron microscopy, immunohistology, molecular diagnosis, tissue banking).
  * ____ Demonstrate the ability to collect and preserve appropriate tissues and fluids for immunofluorescence, electron microscopy, molecular diagnostics, flow cytometric studies and research.
  * ____ Organize surgical pathology reports to include all relevant diagnostic and prognostic information.
  * ____ Prioritize bottom line diagnoses in terms of clinical relevance.
  * ____ Provide prognostic information and be familiar with the biologic behavior of common lesions.
  * ____ Learn and understand CPT coding of specimens and special stains.
  * ____ Be thoroughly familiar with immunohistochemical panels for common diagnostic problems (e.g. small blue cell tumors, carcinoma versus mesothelioma, carcinoma versus sarcoma, differential diagnosis of spindle cell tumors, primary site of a metastatic carcinoma, differential diagnosis of melanoma, immunostains for infectious organisms, endocrine panel, germ cell tumor panel, stains for reserve cells in prostate and breast biopsies, mismatch repair proteins panel, lymphoma panel). (See appendix for Immunohistochemistry Request Form).
  * ____ Be thoroughly familiar with immunostains for prognostic and therapeutic guidance markers (e.g. EGFR, CD117, carbonic anhydrase IX, Ki67, p53, steroid receptors, etc.).
  * ____ Recognize specific bacterial infections, including Helicobacter pylori, pseudomembranous colitis, necrotizing fasciitis and others.
  * ____ Recognize common viral cytopathic effects, including herpes, CMV, RSV, polyoma, adenovirus and others.
  * ____ Recognize fungal organisms, including Aspergillus, Candida, Mucor, Histoplasma, Blastomyces, Cryptococcus and others.
  * ____ Be thoroughly familiar with histochemical stains for infectious organisms (e.g. Gram, Fite, Ziehl Neelsen, Gomori methenamine silver, periodic acid-Schiff), including indications for staining and morphologic appearance of the organism.
  * ____ Enumerate the elements of a satisfactory histological sections and stains, and to identify the possible reasons for unsatisfactory preparations.
  * ____ Know how to use micrometer (e.g. Breslow's thickness in melanomas, distance to margins, etc.).
  * ____ Be able to critically analyze information from an article in context of other available literature.
  * ____ Prepare and present cases for clinicopathologic conferences (e.g., surgery, medicine, renal, and other conferences).
  * ____ Be familiar with the ultrastructural appearance of normal organelles.
  * ____ Use of ultrastructural criteria for differential diagnosis of common infectious, neoplastic, and hereditary/metabolic diseases.
  * ____ Be thoroughly familiar with procedures used for medico-legal cases.
  * ____ Be familiar with entities that require submission of tissue samples to laboratories outside the U of M; including metabolic diseases, immunotherapy, inter-institutional protocol studies for neuroblastomas, Ewing sarcoma, melanoma, etc. and tumor chemosensitivity essays.
  * ____ Review cases with clinicians/surgeons after discussion with staff pathologist.
  * ____ Be able to interpret common "rush" transplant organ biopsies.
  * ____ Be able to present cases at conferences with clarity, completeness, and high-quality illustrations, and to reach reasonable interpretative conclusions, including literature review.
  * ____ Describe current regulations emanating from the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regarding protection of patient confidentiality; demonstrate knowledge of how such rules impact the pathology laboratory and means for their implementation in the handling of human tissues for diagnostic work and research.

To summarize, the items highlighted above represent a series of skills that
you have to make sure that you develop or acquire during your training in
Anatomic Pathology.

What follows is a description of the BASIC SCHEDULE OF ROTATIONS IN ANATOMIC
PATHOLOGY; this will provide a timetable and rotation framework during which
you should accomplish the above objectives. It should be evident that given
the complexity of the skills and the large number if variables, acquisition of
these skills can not be regimented to specific periods or places. Rather,
these are skills that must be developed progressively during the training,
including "core" rotations and "advanced" elective rotations in surgical
pathology or in specific subspecialties.

#### Basic Schedule Of Rotations: Anatomic Pathology

The "CORE" anatomic pathology residency comprises 18 months. Three months are
spent at the University and at each of the three affiliated institutions
(HCMC, ANWH, VAMC). Three months are dedicated to cytopathology (one month
each at the University, HCMC and ANWH), and one month each dedicated to
forensic pathology at the Coroner's Office, neuropathology at the University
and to renal pathology; the latter can be done at the University, HCMC or a
combination of both institutions.

"ADVANCED ROTATIONS": Six months, they include senior elective rotations in
surgical pathology or in subspecialty rotations beyond the "core". The program
will attempt to accommodate individual preferences; however, availability, and
individual institutional support are also taken into consideration.

_(Note: Skill Level I is attached to items for which training will begin
immediately on entering the AP education track; Skill Level II denotes
material typically covered at a more advanced level of training in the
residency program and in advanced senior elective rotations)_

  1. **Anatomic Pathology I** (core program: first 4 to 6 months). Includes autopsy pathology and is combined with surgical pathology training. _Skill Level I_.
  2. **Anatomic Pathology, Advanced** (Core program: last 12 to 14 months and additional Senior Elective rotations: six months). _Skill Level II_.
  3. **Surgical Pathology I** (Core: Three months) _Skill Level I_.
  4. **Surgical Pathology II** (Core: Nine months and Advanced Senior Elective rotations: 6 months) _Skill Level II_.
  5. **Cytopathology** _Skill level I_ (First month).
  6. **Cytopathology** _Skill Level II_ (Second and third months and Cytopathology Fellowship)
  7. **Neuropathology** (Core 1 month) _Skill Level I_
  8. **Neuropathology** (Senior advanced elective rotations) _Skill level II_
  9. **Immunohistochemistry and Electron Microscopy** (incorporated in Surgical Pathology and Autopsy). _Skill Levels I and II_.
  10. **Laboratory Management** (incorporated in AP rotations). _Skill Levels I and II_.

#### Learning Objectives

##### Anatomic Pathology I

**_Skill Level I_**

  1. Demonstrate competency in basic skills in anatomic pathology (see above).
  2. Demonstrate competent autopsy prosection using routine techniques, completing gross examination in a period of 3 hours for uncomplicated cases or 4 hours for complicated cases.
  3. Show the ability to correctly describe common abnormalities of diseased organs by gross and microscopic examination, including congenital, degenerative, inflammatory, neoplastic, and autoimmune disorders.
  4. Demonstrate an ability to compose a provisional anatomic diagnostic report of autopsy findings within 24 hours of completing the postmortem examination.
  5. Demonstrate an ability to compose a final autopsy report according to an approved format and within 30 days of completing the postmortem examination, including accurate and complete anatomic diagnoses, thorough gross and microscopic descriptions, and pertinent clinicopathologic correlations and mechanistic interpretations.

**Recommended readings**

  * Knight B (ed): Simpson's Forensic Medicine, ed 11. London, Edward Arnold, 1997
  * Ludwig J: Handbook of Autopsy Practice, ed 3. Wotawa, NJ, Humana Press, 2002
  * Rutty GN: Essentials of Autopsy Practice. New York, Springer-Verlag, 2002
  * Stocker JT, Dehner LP (eds): Pediatric Pathology, ed 2. Philadelphia, PA, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001

##### Anatomic Pathology, Advanced

**_Skill Level II_**

  1. Independently perform at least 1 adult and 1 pediatric autopsy (with the possible assistance of dieners and/or pathology assistants), demonstrating: 
    * Familiarity with the laws regarding permission for autopsy and the classification of those autopsies requiring medicolegal status.
    * Knowledge of modified autopsy techniques, such as Rokitansy-style organ removal, other en-bloc dissections, needle biopsies, aspiration of joint fluid, and procurement of spinal fluid.
    * Ability to remove the brain and spinal cord without causing damage to either structure.
    * Ability to remove the eyes, the epiglottis and tongue, and the inner and middle ears, and to examine leg veins for thrombi, bones, and joints.
    * Ability to identify those cases for which blood samples and vitreous eye fluid are required for biochemical tests, and to collect those samples in the proper fashion.
    * Ability to describe those circumstances in which specimens (fluids or tissues) should be kept for toxicological studies, and knowledge of how to do so.
  2. Demonstrate a

