---
title: Cellular Therapy at University of Minnesota Medical Center, University Campus 
layout: default
categories: 
- rotations
- cp
- elective
---
#  Cellular Therapy at University of Minnesota Medical Center, University Campus

The major purpose of the cell therapy rotation is to provide the residents
with a working familiarity with current therapeutic options and applications
of cellular therapies and insight into future research and development in the
field. Although the role of the resident during the rotation is not primarily
to provide a service function to the laboratory, residents are expected to
take part in daily laboratory activities and didactic-Socratic teaching
conferences that allow the residents to concentrate primarily on educational
goals rather than service-related concerns.

After the training period, the resident will be knowledgeable and experienced
with basic and advanced techniques and future applications of hematopoietic
progenitor cell collection, storage, processing, and infusion. The resident
should gain a sufficient knowledge base of the cellular therapies so that
he/she can intelligently discuss their appropriate applications, advantages
and disadvantages. It is also hoped that they may also have creative ideas for
improving the techniques and their applications; these will be encouraged and
directed.

  * Institutional Site Director  
[Anthony Killeen, M.D.,
Ph.D.](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/killeen/)

  * Coordinating Teaching Faculty Member  
[Shanna Morgan, M.D.](http://pathology.umn.edu/about/faculty/morgan/)

  * Training Site:  
University of Minnesota Medical Center

  * Duration of Rotation:  
One month

  * Post Graduate Level of Residents Involved  
PGY levels 1-4

#### Supervisory Guidelines For Patient Care

While not the major focus, the resident is involved in some clinical services
(regularly scheduled stem cell infusions, decisions regarding deviation from
normal procedures, problem-solving, etc) under supervision of the medical
director of the Cell Therapy Clinical Laboratory. The resident participates in
several individual didactic sessions, covering the range of current and
developmental cellular therapies, with the Cell Therapy Clinical Laboratory
medical director.

#### Goals And Learning Objectives

  1. **Hematopoietic Progenitor Cell Processing - The resident will:**  

    1. Understand the current theories and applications of hematopoietic transplantation.
    2. Understand the concepts of engraftment, ways in which it is measured, and use of cytokines to speed marrow engraftment.
    3. Have an introductory knowledge of the regulatory aspects of basic and advanced clinical cell engineering, including the role of the Food and Drug Administration.
    4. Have an introductory knowledge of the quality control aspects of a clinical cell engineering laboratory including cell enumeration, viability, functional evaluation, and detection of microbial contamination.
    5. Understand current theory and applications regarding collection and storage of hematopoietic progenitor cells.
    6. Understand techniques for thawing and transfusing cryopreserved hematopoietic cell grafts, including known adverse reactions. Will participate in these infusions.
    7. Understand the overall theory and methods of T-cell depletion, and related cell engineering methods to control or exploit graft-vs.-host disease.
    8. Understand current clinical methods and rationale underlying positive selection of CD34+ cells.
    9. Have a basic theoretical and practical understanding of selected cell engineering methods involving cell expansion, cell activation, and genetic modification.

#### Opportunities To Function As Consultant To Other Physicians

Due to the brevity of the rotation, the lack of experience of the rotating
residents and the specialized requirements of the clinicians requesting
consultations, there is limited opportunity for the residents to function in
the capacity of a consultant while on this rotation. The resident will,
however, accompany the Cell Therapy Clinical Laboratory Medical Director
during consultations, and will be involved in a primarily educational
capacity.

#### On-Call Duties

The resident is expected to be available to laboratory personnel, either in
person or by pager, throughout the working day. No on-call duties outside of
regular laboratory working hours are assigned to the resident.

#### Communication With On-Duty Faculty

Teaching faculty members on service are physically present or available by
phone/pager during standard operating hours (8:00 AM - 5:00PM). A supervising
faculty member is available on-call at all times for questions.

#### Education In Management

The resident is invited to attend the Cell Therapy Clinical Laboratory staff
meetings and other meetings related to the research and development of new
techniques and applications in the laboratory. The resident also becomes
involved in management issues, as they arise during the course of the workday.
These issues are further discussed in the tutorial sessions with the
laboratory director. Transfusion-associated management issues related to
planning, organizing, staffing, and economics of the laboratory are discussed
at the weekly city-wide blood bank conference that the resident attends.

#### Required Conferences

  1. Clinical Pathology Conference, weekly, residents and faculty present and discuss interesting clinical pathology cases, recent advancements in clinical pathology, and the interpretation of laboratory values in terms of a clinical setting. This conference provides a weekly forum for trainee and faculty discussion of difficult and unusual cases. The conference is composed of both a 30 minute resident and 30 minute faculty presentation. Residents develop their presentation under the guidance of a faculty member with whom they are currently rotating. This conference provides trainees with the opportunity to correlate and discuss pathologic findings and a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching.
  2. Laboratory Medicine Grand Rounds, weekly, residents attend conferences on a variety of basic science and clinical topics. Conference is held on the University of Minnesota Medical School Campus.
  3. Blood and Marrow Transplantation Conference, weekly, the residents attend this conference to learn and discuss current and future cell and tissue engineering applications, and to participate with BMT clinicians in discussions of clinical studies.
  4. Rosai/Sinard Conference, Friday, weekly, residents present a variety of real cases on a theme related to a recent or up-coming faculty Resident's Conference. This conference provides a regular avenue for trainee peer teaching with feedback given by the Chief Resident's Subcommittee.
  5. Resident's Conference, Friday, weekly, residents attend conferences on a variety of scheduled pathology topics given by the faculty.
  6. AABB/ISHAGE Cell and Tissue Engineering Teleconferences. These are held approximately 2-3 times annually and are attending by the resident.

#### Optional Conferences

  1. Hematology/Oncology Case Conference, weekly, this is frequently attended by the resident because patients with ongoing transfusion problems and patients undergoing therapeutic apheresis are often discussed. The resident will often be involved in providing data and learning how a clinical decision is made.
  2. City-Wide Blood Bank Conferences, weekly, the resident is expected to attend and participate in case discussions. This conference provides trainees with the opportunity to discuss current issues in transfusion medicine, including cell and tissue engineering.
  3. Periodic Clinical Effectiveness Committee Meetings. The resident is often invited to this management meeting.
  4. Minnesota Association of Blood Banks. The resident is invited to attend this annual scientific two day conference.
  5. National Professional Society Meeting. Periodically (approximately every other year) at least one resident attends the annual American Association of Blood Banks meeting and presents an abstract or poster about a unique transfusion problem.

#### Scholarly Activities/Research

The resident is expected to regularly review the current medicine literature
related to cases in the Cell Therapy Clinical Laboratory, future areas for
laboratory growth, and is asked to present a topic for review to the medical
director. The resident evaluates and discusses research findings in the
literature and receives feedback from faculty. The resident is urged to write
and publish interesting or unique cell engineering problems encountered during
the rotation. Appropriate faculty members guide the resident through the
process leading to a publication. If a resident is interested in a research
project and has sufficient time, faculty members will arrange this in one of
the associated research laboratories.

#### Resident Evaluation

If the resident fails to meet expected knowledge goals during the rotation,
the lead faculty member meets with the resident to evaluate the problem and
develop a corrective action plan. Residents will be evaluated on performance
of daily activities (described previously), participation in required meetings
and conferences, and presentations to the staff on assigned cases. The
residents are provided with continuous feedback on their performance during
the rotation. In general, only deficiencies are noted in writing. Residents
are evaluated on their demonstrated ability to provide informative
consultation to the clinical service teams, their medical knowledge, their
application of this knowledge to efficient/quality patient care, and their
diagnostic, technical and observational skills. Residents are also evaluated
on their interpersonal skills, professional attitudes, reliability, and ethics
with members of the teaching faculty, peers, laboratory staff, and clinicians.
They are further evaluated on their initiative in fostering quality patient
care and use of the medical literature, as it relates to their assigned cases.
Their timely completion of assigned interpretive reports is another component
of the evaluation. Residents on probation receive a written mid-rotation
evaluation.

#### Educational Resources Available

The Biomedical Library of the University of Minnesota is located on the same
campus as the teaching hospital. The resident has full access to borrowing,
copying and literature searching at this library. The Cell Therapy Clinical
Laboratory medical director provides ready access to cell therapy-related
textbooks and journals (Cytotherapy, Journal of Hematotherapy, Blood). The
Transfusion Medicine Division maintains a small library of it own, containing
pertinent text books and selected journals (Transfusion, Vox Sanguinis).
Computer literature searches can be performed in the resident's office.
Faculty members also have extensive reprint files readily available to
residents.

#### Computer Information Systems For Education And Service Duties

In addition to the blood bank specific computers, residents have continuous
access to the laboratory and hospital clinical information systems, which
relate to patient care.

  1. The Phoenix Cell Therapy Clinical Laboratory Information System.
  2. The KDS system for Fairview-University Medical Center laboratories.
  3. The Abaton system (accessed via the Internet) for Fairview-University Medical Center patient information, medical records, radiology, tissue pathology, and laboratory data.

Literature searches can be performed via the network-based system in the
Laboratory, via the computers in the residents' room, or via the computers in
the University of Minnesota Biomedical Library.

